---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "253. Engels to Regina Bernstein. 15 August "
Page_Range: "529-531"
---

# 253. Engels to Regina Bernstein. 15 August 



**[p. 498]**

Your

F.E.

The Roshers send their kindest regards.

First published in: Marx and Engels, p r i n t e d a c c o r d i n g t o t h e o r i gi n al Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

253

ENGELS TO REGINA BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

The Firs, Brading Road, Ryde, England (that suffices) 15 August 1892

Dear Gine,

I and all the rest of us here are very sorry that your summer holi- day should have been so sadly disrupted, but we all of us hope that all danger is now past, for otherwise I should certainly have heard from you. Unfortunately, my projected trip has also been completely rui- ned; just when I was about to get ready, I detected the unmistakable symptoms of an old disorder which I thought I had got the better of five years ago and which precluded all exercise for at least a fortnight if not a month. So I have got to remain stuck here in Ryde,530 but first I had to spend a couple of days in London to put all my affairs in order there, and this, together with the many letters arising out of the 'catastrophe ordained by God', has so flummoxed me that I have not been able to write to you until today.

[^1]: I can well believe that Ernstb is very down as a result of typhoid.

[^2]: a Julie Bcbel-b Ernst Schattner





**[p. 499]**

Since I have been here, we have been having marvellous weather and I am able to spend nearly all day, usually until 6 or 7 o'clock, sit- ting out in the garden in an armchair; there have been only 2 wet days in almost three weeks. Let us hope it lasts, since fresh air, along with rest, is my best medicine.

I am glad to hear that Ede is to make, or is already making, one more excursion into the Alps. He undoubtedly needs it, although it was with great pleasure that I saw from the Neue Zeit that he was his old self again.542 His critique of Proudhon is very nice indeed, and his sense of humour is also returning. But it's better to be safe than sorry, i. e. to get properly well while he's got the chance, and thoroughly shake off his vexation over the Lassalle business" which was, after all, at the root of the whole thing. And you, too, ought to have a spell in which to re- cover from the difficult days and nights which have wrought such havoc with the peace and quiet of your holiday.

In other respects all is well here — that is, Pumps is as well as 'cir- cumstances' allow, the event being expected in October. The chil- dren are far healthier than they used to be in London. This is a very large family: 2 dogs, 3 cats, a canary, a rabbit, two guinea pigs, a cock and 14 hens.

Many regards from the Roshers and especially from myself to you and Ede and Ernst.

Your old friend,

The General

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 253-54, 316.



