---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "254. Engels to Victor Adler. 19 August "
Page_Range: "531-533"
---

# 254. Engels to Victor Adler. 19 August 



**[p. 254]**

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER 5 4 3

IN LUNZ

Ryde, England, 19 August 1892 The Firs, Brading Road

Dear Victor,

That's what comes of exuberance. Instead of gallivanting round with you and yours in Lunz or Vienna, I have got to stay here in Ryde, miserably cossetting what Heine called 'my not altogether healthy body'; though walking and drinking are forbidden, boredom evidently is not. I had so very much looked forward to seeing Vienna at last, to being with you and all the others and, in particular, to be- coming personally acquainted with your wifea and children, and now this confounded business crops up. Besides, I had also intended to ob- tain the opinion of a Viennese or — possibly also — a Berlin doctor on this somewhat obscure case and to ask you, after acquainting you with the facts, which specialist you would recommend. For over here there are as many medical faculties as there are hospitals, and the only men whom family doctors recommend are those from the hospi- tal where they themselves did their training; this is not altogether a bad thing because they are the men they know best, but it narrows down the field of possible consultants very considerably and reduces the medical world of London to the dimensions of a small German university town. Accordingly, this sudden relapse is, in addition, posi- tively detrimental to me.

Well, if there's one consolation — it is that to postpone is not to de- fer indefinitely, and what has misfired one year may perhaps come off the next. At all events this has taught me a lesson which I shall not soon forget. To be completely done out of my summer trip — and what a trip! — is bad enough and I shall have cause enough to rue it this winter, for I know all too well that the slight change of air from London to Ryde 5 3 0 does not have anything like the same effect on my old carcase as a trip to the Continent and to the Alps in particu- lar. My health will not be as good this year as it was after the trips I made, first to America,441 then to Norway544 and, last year, to

[^1]: a Emma Adler





**[p. 501]**

While here I've been dabbling in early Christianity and am read- ing Renan" and the Bible.545 Though shockingly superficial, Renan is a man of the world and as such his outlook is wider than that of the German scholastic theologians. Otherwise his book is a novel and what he said of Philostratus is equally applicable to himself, namely that it could be used as an historical source in the same way as, say, the novels of Alexandre Dumas père could be used as a source on the period of the Fronde. 546 In matters of detail I have caught him mak- ing the most shocking howlers. Moreover, he plagiarises the Germans with unparalleled effrontery.

Louise will have passed on to you the information I sent her the day before yesterday about the cotton operatives in Lancashire and their sudden conversion to the eight hour day. b ' 5 3 The same sort of thing is happening daily. Yesterday meetings of delegates represent- ing entire districts again voted unanimously in favour of the 48 hour week, while in other districts the motion was carried in all cases with a majority, usually of two thirds. This has finally broken the back of the opposition in the working class.

The Russians are unfortunate. First they have a famine which will recur again this year, if in more chronic form, and then the cholera. And now, when their friend Gladstone has come to the helm here, he has to appoint Rosebery, who refuses to have any truck with Glad- stone's Russophilia, as his Foreign Secretary.

August wants me to go to Berlin if at all possible. Well, I should like to, but can it be done? For the past ten days I have hardly set foot outside the garden gate and don't yet know whether I am really on the mend. For the fact is that, if I bestir myself just a little too soon or a little too much, I may find myself back where I started. And I have got to make up my mind in ten days or a fortnight at the latest — well, we shall see.

[^1]: a E. Renan, Histoire des origines du christianisme.-1' See this volume, pp. 497, 503-04.



