---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "255. Engels to August Bebel. 20 August "
Page_Range: "533-536"
---

# 255. Engels to August Bebel. 20 August 



**[p. 502]**

F.E.

I shall be staying here at least until the 31st of this month. 5 3 0

First published in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Printed according to the book Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler , , , , - , i • T, I- • • r .i r i , „ . , . , ^ , ,.,. , _„- Published in English in full lor the und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922

first time

255

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN ST GALLEN

Ryde, 20 August 1892

Dear August,

Your letter of the 17th arrived this morning. I am replying at once because, tomorrow being Sunday and this being England, there would otherwise be no certainty of my note reaching you while you are still in St. Gallen. For I wanted to ask you to observe caution vis- à-vis K. Kautsky in regard to Ede. The latter is definitely on the mend, as his article in the Neue %eit goes to show,542 and we must do nothing that might interfere with this. Where his friendship with Ede is concerned, K. Kautsky isn't exactly the soul of discretion and should his letters suggest to Ede that we were secretly conspiring to counteract his enthusiasm for Fabianism,8 7 it might bring about a seri- ous relapse. Neurasthenics are mistrustful, and in my view his vexa- tion over the Lassalle businessa was not only the first symptom of his illness but also quite definitely the cause of its onset. So we must see that there isn't a recurrence. I also suspect that his unduly high opi-

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 253-54, 316.





**[p. 503]**

Yesterday at long last a letter arrived from the Witch in which she grumbles about my not coming. But how could I help it? And what would she have said if I had been stricken down in Engelskirchen or Zurich, as I surely would have been had I set out? And far worse stricken than here, where I could deal with the thing in good time. She also tells me that, whatever happens, she will accompany you to Berlin.

I am very glad that I need not embark on the journey, if it comes off, before 7 September. That gives me a whole month's rest, by which time I hope I'll be fit to travel again. Since yesterday I have at last noted signs of improvement — very slight, but something at any rate. So we shall have to see.

Apropos — have we still got lawyers in Cologne who are members of the party? I still don't quite trust my Prussians and if I had the address of one such I should be armed against all eventualities.

I was very distressed by what you wrote and told me about Vic- tor. 547 Let's hope you'll be able to find some solution. His wife's health also depends on this — worry about the future is said to have been largely responsible for her illness. I had no idea that things were so bad. But the Austrians are like the French and Irish, none of whom are capable of collecting contributions regularly. What is asserting it- self here is the Celtic blood of their forebears, the Norici,54B who were first Romanised and then Germanised. If you want to get an idea of how the General Council of the International fared with the French and their contributions, you should read Paul's two Epis- tles— especially the second — to the Corinthians,d throughout which he complains that les cotisations ne rentrent pas. h

Couldn't you vote the Austrian party a regular subsidy on condi- tion that it goes to Victor? He would, after all, soon be kicked out of Germany since, unlike K. Kautsky, he'd be obliged to work, not on a learned journalc but on a propagandist paper.

The Lancashire cotton operatives are almost literally falling over each other to vote for the 8-hour day (48-hour week). Today the de- legates are meeting in Manchester. Yesterday in Preston, there were 3,600 for and 600 against. But this is a question that Lancashire will

[^1]: * 2 Corinthians, Ch. 7-9-b the contributions are not coming in-1 Die Neue Zeit





**[p. 504]**

It was Mrs Croesel (she's even better than her husband) who told Tussy the stories about the London Independents' Club." But no harm will be done if we save the thing up until we are all back in Lon- don again. As regards the source of the money, there might still be some interest left over from the Guelph funds,23fs and the stupidity of the police is beyond all bounds. At all events, Gilles had and may still have a great deal of money at his disposal. The other chaps are his men of straw.

Today comes the pleasing news that William b refuses to have any truck with the proposal for a two-year period of military service.549

But since this carrot has already been dangled before the noses of the philistines, even the National Liberals 4 ' 4 will find it hard to relinquish it. And this means better chances for a dissolution of the Reichstag.

What pitiful creatures these German bourgeois are! With the gov- ernment's financial requirements increasing year by year, they could no be better placed to purchase a concession of political power in re- turn for each grant of supply, as the English have been doing in a small way from time immemorial. But they don't want to; they leave all the power in the hands of the government and are content to hag- gle over a few paltry pence.

Your old friend,

F.E.

[^1]: Cordial regards to Mrs Juliec and to Mrs Frieda and husband. d

[^2]: The Roshers send their kindest regards. I shall be staying here at any rate until the 31st.530

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^4]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time

[^7]: a See this volume, pp. 497-98.-b William I I - ' Julie Bebel-d Frieda and Ferdinand Simon



