---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "258. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 23 August "
Page_Range: "538-541"
---

# 258. Engel s to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 23 August 



**[p. 258]**

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE 3 5'

IN HOBOKEN

Ryde, Isle of Wight, 23 August 1892

Dear Sorge,

If I have not yet begun negotiations with Dietz regarding your book, 50° it is because I was prevented by the following circumstan- ces:

I had arranged with L. Kautsky, who is in Vienna, and with Bebel, who is staying with his son-in-law " in St Gallen, that at the end of this month Bebel and I should go to Stuttgart together and thence to Ber- lin via Vienna, where we were to collect Louise Kautsky and take her with us. While in Stuttgart I had intended to settle the matter ver- bally with Dietz.

Now during my stay here in Ryde with Pumps, 5 3 0 the old trouble in my groin, which had ceased to bother me for five years past, has suddenly made itself felt again and to such good purpose that for the past twelve days or so I have been crippled and unable to move. This put paid to my journey and now, although I am visibly better, I don't know whether I shall be in good enough shape to undertake a shorter tour. In any case I should not take in Stuttgart and hence shall shortly begin negotiations with Dietz by letter — as soon, that is, as I know that he hasn't gone off on a lightning tour with Bebel. The matter as such is already settled; all we are concerned with are the de- tails, so you can go ahead with your addenda and the more compre- hensive you make them the better. Notably, should you propose to do a more detailed account of the post-1870 period, you might well in- clude the vicissitudes of the professedly socialist (German) party 133

and the blunders it has made. For you should remember that you are writing for a public that knows nothing whatever about transatlantic matters and has got to be told what's what. And even if this elicits a snarl from the worthy leaders in New York and Cincinnati, it needn't worry you, for after all you have long been used to that sort of thing.

Here is a piece of news which you must keep secret, above all from

[^1]: * Ferdinand Simon





**[p. 508]**

As you will have seen from the municipal elections in May 4 2 8 and the departmental elections in J u l y , 5 5 4 the French are increasingly following in the footsteps of the Germans and learning to make use of universal suffrage instead of inveighing against it. And the cause is proving a great draw. At the Marseilles Congress 5 5 5 the 'Marxists' will acquire a standing such as they have never had before.

Add to which the splendid progress made here in England. T h e elections were a great success. 5 0 4 You will have noticed how different the tone of the Workman's Times has been since the beginning of July, and how M r Burgess (Autolycus) is already attempting to found a separate 'INDEPENDENT LABOUR RARTV under his own leadership, alongside

the one which the SOCIALIST DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 2 9 claims to lead. You will have gleaned the essentials from Louise Kautsky's 5 5 6 and Tussy's 5 3 8 articles in the Vienna Arbeiter-Leitung and the Neue £eit and will find a certain amount more in the preface to the new edition of the Condition of the Working Class in England* which I shall be sending

UNIONISTS, has treated with disdain all the political resolutions of the self-same Congress, and has implemented none of them; and 2. be- cause of the conversion of the textile workers who, last year, went to make up the bulk of the opposition to the 8-hour day but have now, because of the poor state of trade, suddenly and en masse declared themselves in favour of 8 hours. Last week the whole of Lancashire vot- ed in all districts for 8 hours instead of 10, usually by a very big

[^1]: you as soon as I get back to London. T h e TRADES UNION Congress to be held in Glasgow in a fortnight's t i m e 5 4 0 will mark a great step for- ward: 1. because of the impact of the elections which has been all the greater in that the PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE 5 5 7 elected last year in Newcastle, 2 9 8 and consisting oddly enough entirely of former o/.n

[^2]: a F.Engels, 'Preface to the Second German Edition (1892) of The Condition oj the Working-Class in England?.





**[p. 509]**

In Germany everything is going splendidly; if you follow the party news in the Vorwärts you will see that we are making tremendous headway amongst the rural population — even in the east where it is most necessary.

And now you want me to tell you whether I shall be coming over next year. It's not out of the question, though it certainly won't be in the heat of July and August — one August in New York was quite enough for me. 441 Bebel is thinking of visiting America after the Zu- rich Congress,541 i.e. in September or October. If he does, I might accompany him. But these are castles in the air. For, as you can see, even the plan I made for this year fell through a fortnight after it had been definitely decided upon, so how can I be expected to make plans a whole year in advance?

I realised long ago that some time you'd find it necessary to break with that madman Hepner. The man's got a mass of bees in his bon- net and either learns nothing or else gets it all wrong.

My regards to Schlüter also.

Your

F.E.

[^1]: Cordial regards to your wife.a

[^2]: First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart,

[^3]: 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^6]: Katharina Sorge



