---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "261. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 4 September "
Page_Range: "545-548"
---

# 261. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 4 September 



**[p. 514]**

I return to London next week; although I'm better today, it is nevertheless unlikely that anything will come of my trip to Berlin.

Many regards to everyone on the editorial staff.3

Your

F.E.

First published in Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Printed according to the book Reden und Briefe, Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels, Wien, 1922 Published in English for the first time

261

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY 4 3 9

IN STUTTGART

Ryde, 4 September 1892

Dear Baron,

Ede wants to know when I shall be back in London, but instead of giving me his address he merely states that he has left Kilchberg and is en route to Zurich; moreover, all the times he gives are so vague as to make it quite impossible to correspond with him at this range. As I imagine that you are better informed than I am, perhaps you would tell him that I return to London the day after tomorrow, the 6th.530

My lameness still rules out any possibility of my travelling further than that. In London I shall probably have to spend another two weeks lying on the sofa, but otherwise the thing is of no significance.

Sorge's article on Homestead naturally takes precedence. Come to that, I am in no great hurry provided the German text appears at the same time as the English one or a little later.561 Needless to say I have heard nothing about the latter for the past two months.

[^1]: Had you been here during the last election,504 you would have

[^2]: a of the Arbeiter-Leitung





**[p. 515]**

That is the crux of the whole matter. Now that, for the first time, the workers are taking an independent stand, the FABIAN SOCIETY is urging them to remain an appendage of the Liberals. And this must be made abundantly clear to the continental Socialists; to hush it up would be to connive at it. And that is why I am sorry that the Ave- lings' postscript should have failed to appear.538 It was not written postfestum* not as an afterthought, but was overlooked in the hurry to get the article off. The article is incomplete without the description of the attitude of the two Socialist organisationsh in regard to the elec- tions— and the readers of the Neue £eit have a right to hear about this.

I believe that I myself told you in my last letter that both in the SO- CIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 29 and in the FABIAN SOCIETY the provincial members are better than the central body. But that won't do any good so long as the attitude of the central body determines that of the Society. As to the rest of those sterling fellows, I know none of them apart from Banner. Since joining the FABIAN SOCIETY Banner has not, oddly enough, put in an appearance at my house. I imagine he was

[^1]: a after the event-b The Fabian Society and the Social Democratic Federation





**[p. 516]**

You feel that there is something half-baked about the FABIAN SO- CIETY. On the contrary, the chaps are only too well done, a clique of middle class 'socialists' of varying calibre from the careerist to the sen- timental socialist and the philanthropist, who are united only in their fear of impending Labour rule and are moving heaven and earth to avert this threat by consolidating their own leadership — the leader- ship of the 'heddicated'.a If they then admit a working man or two to their central executive, thereby enabling the latter to perform an Al- bert ouvrier^ of 1848 act in the shape of a constantly outvoted mino- rity, that ought to deceive nobody.

The means employed by the FABIAN SOCIETY are indistinguishable from those employed in corrupt parliamentary politics: money, in- trigue, careerism, i. e. after the English fashion where it is taken for granted that every political party (save only, it seems, in the case of Labour!) should pay its agents in one way or another or reward them with posts. These chaps are up to their eyes in the intrigues of the Liberal party and hold office in it, one such being Sydney Webb who is altogether a typical British POLITICIAN. There is nothing one can tell the workers to beware of that these chaps are not already practising.

This is not to suggest, of course, that you should treat these people as enemies. But in my view they should no more be shielded from cri- ticism than anyone else. And that is what the omission from the Ave- lings' article of the passage relating to them certainly looked like. But if you would like the Avelings to supply you with an article on the his- tory and attitude of the various socialist organisations in England, you have only to say so and I shall suggest it to them.

I was very taken with your article on Vollmar'; it will do him more harm than any amount of wrangling in the Vorwärts.532 Moreover, the endless threats of expulsion ought no longer to remain uncensured. Today they are wholly uncalled for reminders of the dictatorial period of the Anti-Socialist Law.1 ' One must now give the rotten ele- ments time to become so rotten that they defect virtually of their own accord. The discipline of a party numbered in millions is quite differ-

[^1]: a The Berlin dialect in the original.-b Albert the working man-' K. Kautsky, 'Voll- mar und der Staatssozialismus', Die Neue ^eit, 10. Jg. 1891/92, 2. Bd., Nr. 49.



