---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "262. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 5 September "
Page_Range: "548-549"
---

# 262. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 5 September 



**[p. 517]**

Ede's critique of Proudhon 542 was also very nice. I was especially glad to see that he is his old self again.

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, n , •• • • • TI _. ,„„ ' Published in English lor the first Prag, 1935

time

262

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

[Ryde, 5 September 1892]

Dear Baron,

If you look at the reports on England and Germany over the signa- ture 'B' or Bernard in the Socialiste, it will enable you to judge to what extent you can make use of him. Bonnier is a sterling fellow, but his German studies have somewhat spoiled the Frenchman in him, something I have observed more than once in his fellow countrymen. He lives in a world of books and will find it difficult accurately to weigh the facts of the living movement one against the other. More- over he resides at Oxford, far removed from all the activity, besides which he has an unshakeable faith in Guesde. Guesde's illusions and optimism are in many respects of great value within the movement it- self, in much the same way as are Liebknecht's; neither is prone to de- spair. But these qualities are hardly suited to the reporting of current activities. However Bonnier, with his native intelligence, is bound

[^1]: I forgot to reply to you about Bonnier the day before yesterday.562



