---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "266. Engels to Conrad Schmidt. 12 September "
Page_Range: "556-559"
---

# 266. Engels to Conrad Schmidt. 12 September 



**[p. 525]**

Yours

F.E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, „ , , . , , . „ , . , , . , ,- Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time

266

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT 1 7 7

IN ZURICH

London, 12 September 1892

Dear Schmidt,

A few days ago I came back from Ryde where I had been paying an involuntary six-week visit to Pumps.530 A tiresome but otherwise insignificant complaint ruined both my holiday and a continental tour in the course of which you might otherwise have very possibly seen me in Zurich.

I look forward to seeing your other papers on the rate of profit. Fire- man didn't send me his article15 — can one get hold ofthat particu- lar number? If so, I shall order it, provided you can tell me exactly which number it was, and also the title of the article. To print the sec- tion on the rate of profit separately and in advance is quite out of the question, for you should know that in Marx everything is so interre- lated that nothing can be torn out of context. In any case — always provided my health holds out and / am left in peace—I shall be done with Volume III e this winter (but please don't breathe a word about this; I know how often something has intervened),

[^1]: " Julie Bebel - b P. Fireman, 'Kritik der Marx'schen Werttheorie', Jahrbücher für Natio- nalökonomie und Statistik, 3. Folge, Bd. 3, Jena, 1892.-c of Capital





**[p. 526]**

As regards Marx's view of history, you will find an article of mine about it in the next number of the Neue £eit— it has already appeared over here in English.462

The Germans are utterly useless on the subject of money and cred- it. Many years ago Marx himself mercilessly ridiculed Knies.566

The most useful things in English are Tooke's An Inquiry into the Cur- rency Principle, 1844 and Fullarton's On the Regulation of Currencies, 2nd ed., 1845, both of which are only to be had second-hand. Every- thing there is to be said about money qua money may be found in the first volume of Capital. In the third there will, of course, be a great deal about credit and credit money; it is that particular section that is giving me most trouble.

Roger's Economic Interpretation of History is in many respects a very instructive book, if exceedingly superficial theoretically speaking. There is, of course, no question of an interpretation à la Marx.

Your essay in the Neue £eit* gave me great pleasure. It's as if cut out for this country, since the FABIAN SOGIKTY87 positively pullulates with Jevons-Mengerians 522 who look down with infinite contempt on a Marx they have long since outdistanced. If there were a review over here that would take it, I would, with your permission, get Aveling to translate it under my supervision. But just now nothing is likely to come of this, there being no such review.

As regards the worthy Independents,333 their fate is of their own making. For years the party has endured their yapping with truly an- gelic patience and even at Erfurt301 it gave them ample opportunity to substantiate their mendacious tittle-tattle, but a million people cannot go on forever putting up with the obstructionism of fifty young whippersnappers who reserve the right to cast aspersions with- out having to substantiate them. Now that they've been chucked out, now that they have the chance of showing what they are capable of, all we get is endless lies and vituperation. And what, may I ask, has been achieved by those who showed some promise—the Kampff-

[^1]: J C. Schmidt, 'Die psychologische Richtung in der neueren National-Oekonomie', Die Neue Zeit, 10. Jg. 1891/92, 2. Bd., Nr. 40, 41.





**[p. 527]**

I am aware that you have many childhood and university friends amongst the Jungen, but it's something you must come to terms with. Indeed it's perfectly possible to remain good friends despite po- litical differences. But we've all had to go through the same thing, in my case, in my own pious ultra-reactionary family. And then there is always the possibility of exerting a beneficial influence on your old friends by guiding their footsteps towards study rather than rodo- montade. If the gentlemen would only go on with their studies, the more serviceable amongst them would soon come to their senses. But I'm afraid that the chronic megalomania so rampant among these people will prevent them from so doing. And as for provocation and embitterment, these are things that are unavoidable in the circum- stances. T came not to send peace but a sword.'b

[^1]: a Der Sozialist- h Matthew 10:34



