---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "267. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 16 September "
Page_Range: "559-561"
---

# 267. Engels to Karl Kautsky. 16 September 



**[p. 528]**

With kind regards

Your

F. Engels

First published in Sozialistische Monatshefte, Printed according to the original Nr. 24, Berlin, 1920 . . . . . Published in English in lull tor the first time

267

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 16 September 1892

Dear Baron,

Ede has asked me to send you a copy of a passage from the Deutsch- Französische Jahrbücher.5'''' He gives only the opening words, but doesn't say how much is wanted, so you will find herewith a copy of the thing up to the end of the letter and you'll have to see how much of it is usable.

Kovalevsky, who is over here, says he would probably be prepared to let you have an article for the Neue 2jeit on Lavrov's great Russian work ^adaci istoriji mysli, The Functions oj the History of Thought; but he would have to write it in French. If you would like to have the article, please let me know.568

There was high old confusion at the TRADES UNION Congress 540 in Glasgow.b The 'old' unions did everything in their power to achieve victory and, being organised and known to one another and of old repute, they were largely successful vis-à-vis the 'new' ones,520 which didn't yet know the ropes, fell foul of the rules of procedure, were known neither to one another nor to many of the more honest ele- ments amongst the 'old' unions, and hence possessed few personalities

[^1]: a F. Engels, Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England, Stuttgart, 1892. - b See this vol- ume, pp. 519-20 and 522-24.





**[p. 529]**

It is now evident that our Continentals must take up the cudgels against this. It's a good opportunity for them to show the snooty TRADES UNIONS what their standpoint is. A start will doubtless be made by the French at Marseilles. 5 5 5

Unfortunately I shall not be able to send you the Workman's Times for some little while, at any rate. For a time Burgess sent copies to Be- bel and sundry other Continentals, but has suddenly ceased to do so — since the jackass doesn't want to have any truck with Continen- tals who 'do not even possess a TRADES ORGANISATION'. NOW I shall have to send Bebel the copy which in the past has been available for you, since the Executive has got to have one and I can't very well alter be- fore November the number of copies on order; I have trouble enough as it is in getting the right number of copies ordered. In November I shall be renewing my subscription, on which occasion I shall be able to make other arrangements.

[^1]: At the last conference of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 5 6 5 Hynd- man was requested — unanimously, it is said — to resign from the leadership of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION and to confine his activities to writing. We shall see whether it lasts. But it's hard on him.

[^2]: * Neither Hardie nor Tom Mann enjoy popularity in broader circles. Burns, who might have handled many things differently, wasn't there.



