---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "268. Engel s to Regina and Eduard Bernstein. 17 September "
Page_Range: "561-564"
---

# 268. Engel s to Regina and Eduard Bernstein. 17 September 

Though still housebound, I am slowly improving.

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky, T . , , . , , • TI ,• , r • <- „ inoc Published in English for the hrst Prag, 19.55 . ° & time

268

ENGELS TO REGINA AND EDUARD BERNSTEIN 3 5 7

IN ZURICH

London, 17 September 1892

Dear Gine,

From Louise, who came back here on Wednesday,a I have learned that you are still in Zurich and that Käte b is already in this country, and yesterday the letter from you and Ede at last enabled me to con- nect up the broken telegraph wires again. We are most sorry that you should still be so unwell but that is something that will eventually pass, and in the meantime Ede can continue to recuperate in the open air for a while longer, which will be most beneficial for him and do the party no harm, now that he has in any case missed the TRADES UN- ION Congress.540 The latter was the scene of considerable confusion. The most interesting session from our point of view was the one on Thursdayc on the question of the Congress.d If we had known your address, we'd have sent Ede a Scottish paper containing an account of it, but as it is, the few copies we had have been sent elsewhere.

[^1]: a 14 September-11 Käte Schattner-C 8 September-'1 See this volume, pp. 519-20, 522-24 and 528-29.





**[p. 531]**

UNIONS. Besides, who would want to associate himself with all the

WILD THEORIES and the kind of SOCIALISM that throve on the Continent, etc.? (This latter anxiety, in particular, being voiced in rasping tones by a Lancashire weaver,3 one of the new converts to the 8 hour day.)

In short, in their delight that there should now be almost no opposi- tion to the 8 HOURS DAY, and by way of a sop to the weak in spirit — the Lancashire cotton operatives — they unceremoniously consigned the Continentals' invitation to the waste paper basket, and by 189 votes to 97, no less!

Now this, although most of them were probably unaware of what they were doing, was in fact a disgusting insult and a slap in the face for the entire continental Labour movement. We instantly broadcast the news here, there and everywhere and no doubt the first riposte will come from the French in a few days' time at Marseilles.555 It's a heaven-sent opportunity — without making too much of the mat- ter— for putting a damper on the self-conceit of the old TRADES un- ionists who are proving ever more reactionary.

Herewith a Pall- Mall containing an article of Aveling's about the Hamburg socialists and the cholera.1'

In the Daily Chronicle there was a long review, which no doubt you will have seen, of SOCIALISM UTOPIAN, etc.c What a canny lot they are!

The French daily has not yet emerged from the embryonic

[^1]: a David Holmes-'' E. Aveling, 'The Cholera and the Hamburg Socialists', The Pall Mall Gazette, No. 8577, 16 September 1892.-l the English edition (1892) of F. En- gels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific





**[p. 532]**

Louise came back in a very cheerful mood, having found her mother and Ignaz very hale and hearty. She sends her warm regards.

Now for a note to Ede, so farewell for today. With warm regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

Dear Ede,

The relevant passage went off to K. Kautsky" yesterday — indeed the entire letter from the point at which you began to quote; I told K. Kautsky that he would know how much to use, whether the whole thing or only a part, and which part.

At the last conference of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 565 (BANK

HOLIDAY,569 the first Monday in August), Taylor, the unsuccessful candidate for Hackney,b proposed that Hyndman be thrown out. This met with great acclaim, particularly among the provincial dele- gates; however, Taylor was persuaded to tone down his motion in order that as large a majority as possible might be obtained. And thus it was resolved (unanimously, according to Taylor) that Hyndman be requested to resign from the leadership of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION and devote himself to written propaganda. How long this will continue remains to be seen. At all events it is a bitter blow for the megalomaniac. Cahan of New York, who called on him without knowing about this, found him in a very despondent, chastened frame of mind and remarkably conciliatory towards all those he had hitherto torn to shreds.

The Workman's Times, i. e. Burgess, now also wishes to become party leader. You will have seen that the £400, which he placed at the disposal of Burns, Keir Hardie, Taylor and Ben Ellis during the elections, emanated from Champion (or rather, through him, from Hudson's Soap).

[^1]: ü See this volume, p. 528. - b district of London



