---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "270. Engel s to Nikolai Danielson. 22 September "
Page_Range: "566-570"
---

# 270. Engel s to Nikolai Danielson. 22 September 



**[p. 535]**

Give the French comrades my kind regards and keep up the good work, as at Lille.38 Tussy says that the Working Men's Congress there was the most BUSINESS LIKE one she has ever attended.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, P. et Printed according to the original L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. Ill, Paris,

1959 Translated from the French

270

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 2 6 7

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 22 September 1892

My dear Sir,

So far, then, we agree upon this one point, that Russia, in 1892, could not exist as a purely agricultural country, that her agricultural production must be complemented by industrial production.

Now I maintain, that industrial production nowadays, means grande industrie, steam, electricity, selfacting-mules, power-looms, fi- nally machines that produce machinery. From the day Russia intro- duced railways, the introduction of these modern means of produc- tion was a foregone conclusion. You must be able to repair your own locomotives, waggons, railways, and that can only be done cheaply if you are able to construct those things at home, that you intend to re- pair. From the moment, warfare became a branch of grande industrie

(ironclad ships, rifled artillery, quickfiring and repeating cannon, re- peating rifles, steelcovered bullets, smokeless powder etc.) la grande industrie without which all these things cannot be made became a po- litical necessity. All these things cannot be had without a highly devel- oped metal manufacture. And that manufacture cannot be had with- out a corresponding development in all other branches of manufac- ture, especially textile.

I quite agree with you in fixing the beginning of the new industrial



**[p. 536]**

This necessity of the transition from the primitive methods of pro- duction that prevailed in 1854, to the modern methods that are now beginning to prevail— this necessity once conceded, it becomes a sec- ondary question whether the hot-house-process of fostering the indus- trial revolution by protective and prohibitive duties was advanta- geous or even necessary, or otherwise.

This industrial hot-house-atmosphere renders the process acute, which otherwise might have retained a more chronic form. It crams into twenty years a development, which otherwise might have taken sixty or more years. But it does not affect the nature of the process it- self, which, as you say, dates from 1861.

One thing is certain: if Russia really required, and was determined to have, a grande industrie of her own, she could not have it at all, ex- cept under some degree of protection and this you admit. From this point of view too, then, the question of protection is one ofdegree only, not of principle; the principle was unavoidable.

Another thing is certain: if Russia required after the Crimean war a grande industrie of her own, she could have it in one form only: the capitalistic form. And along with that form, she was obliged to take over all the consequences which accompany capitalistic grande industrie in all other countries.

Now I cannot see that the results of the industrial revolution which is taking place in Russia under our eyes, are in any way different from what they are, or have been, in England, Germany, America. In America the conditions of agriculture and landed property are dif- ferent, and this does make some difference.

You complain of the slow increase of hands employed in textile in- dustry, when compared with the increase of quantity of product.— The same is taking place everywhere else. Otherwise, whence our re- dundant 'industrial reserve'? (Capital, c. 23, sect. 3 and 4a).

You prove the gradual replacing of men's work by that of women and children — Capital, c. 13 (sect. 3, a).h

[^1]: a Capital, Part VII, Ch. XXV, Sections 3, 4 (present edition, Vol. 35).-'' Ibid., Part IV, Ch. XXV, Section 3 (present edition, Vol. 35).





**[p. 537]**

Your calculation that the sum of the textile products of grande indus- trie and of domestic industry does not increase, but remains the same and even diminishes, is not only quite correct, but would not be cor- rect if it came to another result. So long as Russian manufacture is confined to the home market, its product can only cover home con- sumption. And that can only slowly increase, and, as it seems to me, ought even to decrease under present Russian conditions.

For it is one of the necessary corollaries of grande industrie, that it de- stroys its own home market by the very process by which it creates it. It creates it by destroying the basis of the domestic industry of the peas- antry. But without domestic industry the peasantry cannot live. They are ruined, as peasants; their purchasing power is reduced to a minimum; and until they, as proletarians, have settled down into new conditions of existence, they will furnish a very poor market for the newly-arisen factories.

Capitalist production being a transitory economical phase, is full of internal contradictions which develop and become evident in propor- tion as it develops. This tendency to destroy its own market at the same time it creates it, is one of them. Another is the 6e3Bwxo^Hoe no- Aoaœmie b to which it leads, and which is developed sooner in a coun- try without a foreign market, like Russia, than in countries which more or less are capable of competing on the open world-market. This sit-

[^1]: a Ibid., Part VIII, Ch. XXX (present edition, Vol. 35).- b desperate position (Russ.)





**[p. 538]**

Yours very truly,

[^1]: P.W. Rosherd

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in the Minuv- Reproduced from the original skiye godji, No. 2, St Petersburg, 1908 , . Published in Lnghsh in full for the first time

[^3]: a landlord (Russ.)-1' peasant-' kulaks-'1 Engels' conspiratorial pseudonym



