---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "272. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 26 September "
Page_Range: "573-574"
---

# 272. Engel s to Karl Kautsky. 26 September 



**[p. 272]**

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 26 September 1892

Dear Baron,

Herewith what I consider to be indispensable amendmentsa to the two passages.575

I. As regards the adoption on the last day of a resolution to attend the Zurich Congress54 ' after all, I have neither read anything to that effect, nor have I heard anything from Aveling who was present. Something of the kind is said to have appeared in the Daily Tele- graph but this cannot be ascertained today. Aveling, who was intend- ing to come here, has not so far, 4.40, turned up, so I am unable to ask him. The report in the Daily News says nothing of the kind. Nor does that in the Workman's Times. Bebel may have seen something of the sort in the Frankfurter.b Consequently, I think it might be safest to qualify the passage as you have done.

II. It is true that a meeting of people describing themselves as the

INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY took place in Glasgow under the chairman- ship of Keir Hardie. It is, however, the INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY which Burgess (Autolycus) of the Workman's Times is attempting to consti- tute off his own bat, and in no sense a genuine, recognised party like, say, our own in Germany or Austria; rather it is a sect like the SOCIAL

DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 29 with which it is in competition. Bebel was probably misled by Keir Hardie's name into taking the thing more seriously than it deserved. But Keir Hardie is a Scot and his diplo- macy is too canny by half; moreover he has an urge to make the most of his new position as M. P. (thereby occasionally making a fool of himself) but will probably turn out well once he's had a chance to sow his wild oats. To my mind he is better than he seems to be just now.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 545-46.-'' Frankfurter Leitung und Handelsblatt



