---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "273. Engel s to August Bebel. 26 September "
Page_Range: "574-579"
---

# 273. Engel s to August Bebel. 26 September 



**[p. 543]**

Your

F.E.

First published in Aus der Frühzeit des Printed according to the original Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mil Kautsky, Prag 1935 Published in English for the first time

273

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 26 September 1892

Dear August,

Louise will already have told you something about Kugelmann. At first, during the 60s, he was on very friendly terms with Marx and did a great deal towards breaking the newspapers' conspiracy of silence over Capital, Volume I. It was also he who persuaded Marx to go to Karlsbad,b which did him a lot of good,460 but after they had been there for a while there was a final parting of the ways. Since Marx's death he has written to me several times, but I have tried to keep my distance, not being convinced of his reliability. At all events he has more than one foot in more than one camp.

that he must first let me know how many he has got. There are all sorts of people wanting it. I believe that not even Tussy or Laura have got a copy. You, too, will be given preference if at all possible.

Arndt is a student who used to be in Geneva, and then went to Spain where he frequented our people in Madrid before coming to this country. While here he was taken under Julius'c wing and he

[^1]: As regards the copies of Herr Vogt, I have written and told him ' 5 3

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 543-47.-b Karlovy Vary-' Julius Motteler





**[p. 544]**

I rather think I remember seeing Meyer" in St Louis, but there are so many people ofthat name. I trust that Kugelmann, who is forever bragging about his connections, will be able to find something out.

Pieper was at one time tutor to the Rothschilds in this country and is now a grammar school teacher in Hanover. Marx once — in 1867, I think — ran into him in the street, by which time he had become a bloated philistine.

I completely agree that you should go on with the annual party conference. If only for constitutional reasons you, as an Executive, should adhere to it, otherwise what a fine pretext it would provide for malcontents. And it's also important that once a year the party it- self should be able to express itself as a body; this is generally appli- cable but doubly so just now — vis-à-vis both the 'Independents'333

and Vollmar.

It is a great pity that you people should have been in such a hurry to put what I told you about Hyndman b into the paper.573 Let me therefore expressly point out once and for all that in future anything I pass on to you in private letters is intended solely for your informa- tion and, where necessary — subject to the usual reservations — for the correction and prevention of inaccuracies or misconceptions in the Vorwärts; not for immediate publication, however, except when this is expressly stated. Otherwise I should have to keep my mouth shut about everything I could not actually substantiate, or else, in most cases, run the risk of having to betray my sources, thus causing these to dry up for the future.

Basically the information as such is quite definitely correct, as every number of Justice goes to show; gone are the attacks on individuals in

[^1]: '" Hermann Meyer-1' See this volume, pp. 524, 529, 532 and 540-41.





**[p. 545]**

In Justice there's a piece by Hyndman expressing the expectation that you people would not print his letter, and to that extent he has made an ass of himself.5 7 4 I shall try and get hold of a copy for you.

I have written and told Kugelmann that, so far as /was competent to say, you were authorised to read the letters from Marx to him. ' 5 3

Also that he would be getting The Knight of the Noble Consciousness.*

I have today received proofs of your article from K. Kautsky with queries about two passages.575

I. There was nothing in the Daily News about the adoption in Glasgow of a resolution that delegates should after all be sent to Zu- rich, nor had Aveling heard anything of the kind, otherwise he's have said so. He was intending to come here today but hasn't turned up. Louise say that on her way here she had seen something of that nature in the Daily Telegraph. In the circumstances I advised K. Kautsky to insert the words: if the relevant newspaper report is true. That covers you completely.

I advised K. Kautsky at all costs to delete the words between dashes: '—whose constitute themselves—'. The Independent La- bour Party now coming into being over here is still very far from con- stituting itself, nor is it desirable that it should yet attempt to do so. It is not yet mature enough. The INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY, whose ad- herents more or less constituted themselves a party in Glasgow under Keir Hardie's chairmanship, is the sect founded by Autolycus (Joseph Burgess) of the Workman's Times, a sect which so far boasts 2,000 members and competes with the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION in re-

[^1]: II. 'The Independent Labour Party now coming into being — whose supporters assembled for the first time after the end of the Glasgow Congress to constitute them- selves—', etc., etc.

[^2]: K. Marx, The Knight of the Noble Consciousness.





**[p. 546]**

Since his election Keir Hardie has been pushing himself to the fore and putting on airs in a way that is both ludicrous and discreditable. Success has gone to his head and he will have to sow his wild oats for a while. He is evidently intent on pushing Burns into the background; the latter is behaving with great fortitude and restraint (he asked leave to call on me in order to consult me about the attitude he should adopt). I think it will all even itself out in the end — Keir Har- die is better than he makes himself out to be, but you should by no means conclude as a matter of course that someting is commendable because he happens to be taking part in it.

Otherwise I find your article quite unexceptionable — composed, dignified and emphatic.

At Marseilles the TRADES UNIONS Congress {Congrès des syndicats) 57° passed a resolution which I had put to Lafargue,a namely that they should not take part in the international congress convoked by the TRADES UX- ro.vs but should invite the latter to attend the Zurich Congress.5*1 This isn't the exact wording which I have yet to receive. Liebknecht will prob- ably send it you as he had just turned up when Lafargue was in the act of writing. The Congress of the Workers' Party 5 5 5 will adopt a similar resolution. I drew Lafargue's attention to the fact that the

TRADES UNIONS do not recognise the validity of Labour Party congresses and resolutions while according respect of a very different order to those of the trades unions. If you in Germany could get the trades un- ions to adopt resolutions along the same lines, this could not fail to make an impact over here; it's something that should certainly not be neglected.

You might send about 12 copies of your article to us for distribution to the papers over here. For their people very seldom understand foreign languages, and whether they would so much as look at it is a complete toss-up. To get anything into the press over here one must employ different methods. If, for instance, Aveling were to take the finished article to the Pall Mall,b he would probably get it in 5 7 6;

[^1]: " See this volume, pp. 533-35.-b The Pall Mall Gazette





**[p. 547]**

Temps, Le Matin, La Justice, L'Intransigeant, Le Parti Ouvrier (Possibilist) and Le Parti Socialiste (49, rue de Rivoli, Blanquist — weekly).

Please let me know whether or not the Workman's Times is still be- ing sent you by the editorial department. Here it is being said that all complimentary copies for countries abroad have been cancelled. If this is true, I shall send it to you instead of to Fischer who can read it at your house or after you have done with it.

Well, I should have liked to write a word or two to your wife," but it is already past 9 p. m. and, contrary to doctor's orders, I have al- ready spent over-long writing by lamplight. I have also had to write to Victorb and to Karl Kautsky which has taken me all day,c so please ask her to excuse me. But she will be getting a letter all to her- self from me. Till then, please give her my warm regards.

Your

General

I have just heard from Louise that you have not been getting an of- ficial copy of the Workman's Times for some while past. So that is one thing settled.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, „ , ,. , , . „ .. , , ,„,„ Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1946 &

[^2]: time

[^3]: Julie Bebel-1' Victor Adler-c See this volume, pp. 539-41 and 542-43.



