---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "275. Engel s to Franz Mehring. 28 September "
Page_Range: "580-583"
---

# 275. Engel s to Franz Mehring. 28 September 



**[p. 275]**

ENGELS TO FRANZ MEHRING

IN BERLIN 5 7 7

London, 28 September 1892

Dear Mr Mehring,

Kautsky has sent me part of one of your letters with an inquiry ad- dressed to me.578 If you feel somewhat hesitant about writing to me because of my failure many years ago to answer two of your letters, I have no right to complain. At the time we were, of course, in differ- ent camps and the Anti-Socialist Law ' ' was in force, imposing upon us the rule that 'he who is not for us is against us'. Moreover, if I re- member rightly you yourself said in one of the letters that you could hardly venture to expect a reply.579 However that was a long time ago and since then we have found ourselves in the same camp. You have also done excellent work for the Neue Zeit, a subject on which I have been far from parsimonious in my tributes when writing to e. g. Bebel.a Accordingly I shall be glad to take this opportunity of re- plying to you direct.

The claim that the discovery of the materialist view of history should be ascribed to the Prussian Romantics of the historical school is certainly new to me. I myself have Marwitz's Nachlass and I read the book a few years ago but found nothing in it other than some splendid stuff about cavalry and an unshakeable belief in the magic powers of five cuts of the whip when administered to the plebs by the nobility. Otherwise I have been a complete stranger to such literature since 1841-42 — I only applied myself to it very superficially — and am certainly in no way indebted to it so far as the present discussion is concerned. Marx became acquainted during his Bonn and Berlin days 5 8 0 with Adam Müller and Mr von Haller's Restauration, etc., and was always somewhat scornful ofthat vapid, cliché-ridden cari- cature of the French Romantics, Joseph de Maistre and Cardinal Bo- nald. But even had he come upon passages such as the one you cite from Lavergne-Peguilhen,581 they could at that time have made ab- solutely no impression on him, always assuming he understood what the chaps were trying to say in the first place. Marx was then a He-

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 375-76 and 387.





**[p. 550]**

It is indeed a highly remarkable passage and I should like to see the quotation verified. I am not familiar with the book, though the au- thor is, of course, known to me as an adherent of the 'historical school'. The passage diverges from the modern view on two counts, 1. in that it derives production and distribution of production from the economic system instead of vice-versa, i.e. the economic system from production, and, 2. in the role it assigns to the 'proper ad- ministration' of the economic system, this being open to any number of interpretations, so long as one is unable oneself to see from the book what the author means.

But the strangest thing of all is that the correct concept of history in abstracto should be found among the very people who have most abused history in concreto —-both theoretically and practically. In the case of feudalism the chaps may have seen that here the political system evolved out of the economic system because here it is, so to speak, plain as a pikestaff. I say may because apart from the above- mentioned unverified passage — you told me yourself that someone gave it to you — all I have ever been able to discover about it is that the theoreticians of feudalism are, needless to say, less abstract than the bourgeois liberals. So if, from this concept of the connection be- tween the political system and the spread of civilisation on the one hand and the economic system within feudal society on the other, one of them proceeds to the generalisation that this applies to all econom- ic and political systems, how then explain the total myopia of this self-same Romantic, the moment he is faced with other economic sys- tems, with the bourgeois economic system and the political systems corresponding to its various stages of development — medieval craft fraternities, absolute monarchy, constitutional monarchy, republic? That is certainly difficult to fathom. And the same chap who regards the economic system as the basis of social and political organisation as a whole, also adheres to the school to whom the absolute monarchy of the 17 th and 18th centuries already signifies the fall of man and a be-



**[p. 551]**

Admittedly he also says that the political system emanates from the economic system and its proper administration as inevitably as does a child from the coupling of man and woman. Having regard to the widely known teaching of the author's school, I can only explain this as follows: The true economic system is the feudal one. But since hu- man malice conspires against that system, it must be properly admin- istered in such a way that its existence is protected against these at- tacks and perpetuated, and that the political system, etc., continues to correspond to it, i. e. is kept, so far as possible, as it was in the 13th and 14th centuries. Then the best of all possible worlds and the finest of historical theories would each be realised, while the Lavergne- Peguilhenian generalisation to the effect that feudal society engenders a feudal polity would be reduced to its true essentials.582

For the time being I can only assume that Lavergne-Peguilhen didn't know what he was saying. According to the proverb, certain animals occasionally discover pearls and among the Prussian Ro- mantics such creatures are strongly represented. Incidentally, it might nevertheless be advisable to compare them with their French prototypes — to see whether this has not also been borrowed.

I can only say how grateful I am to you for drawing my attention to this point which I cannot unfortunately pursue further at this mo- ment.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946



