---
Volume: 49
Document_Title: "3. Eleanor Marx- Aveling to Paul Lafargue. 15 April 1892 "
Page_Range: "591-593"
---

# 3. Eleanor Marx- Aveling to Paul Lafargue. 15 April 1892 



**[p. 3]**

ELEANOR MARX-AVELING TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

[London,] 15 April 1892 65 Chancery Lane, W. C.

My dear Paul,

We sent you some days ago a copy of the Chronicle A containing a statement with regard to Adolphe Smith and the representation of the French Workers at the forthcoming demonstration in Hyde Park.463 In the Workman's Times of this week—I send you a second copy tho' I believe you get one regularly—you will see some notes re- ferring to this under the heading of (I think) 'London notes', and in any case over the signature of Autolycus—i.e. Burgess, Editor of the Workman's Times. Now the result of this paragraph has been much greater and much more unpleasant than you can probably imagine, and unless very disagreeable complications are to follow, you must ab- solutely write to the Chronicle and the Workman's Times on the sub- ject. That is, of course, if the organisations for which M. Adolphe is the mouthpiece are, as we surmise, simply the Possibilist ones.

You know that 2 years ago, when in the face of violent opposition we managed to force a demonstration,58'' you came and spoke from the platforms of the Demonstration Committee. You know that last year your Party was again invited by us, and your letter, stating the reasons why you could not send a delegate was publicly read at the Demonstration. During all this time the London Trades Council 1!)6

working then as now with Mr Hyndman and the English Possibilists, refused to have anything to do with the 'foreigners'. And do not forget the very important fact that the Legal Eight Hours Day demanded by Shipton and Co. is not our Legal Eight Hours Day. They only want the 8 hours day legalised in order that over-time may be more highly paid.

[^1]: Now seeing all this our Committee 20° who have held steadfastly to the whole Paris programme,586 and specially the strongest body not only on our Committee, but the strongest of the New Unions 164— that of the 'Gas Workers and General Labourers'520—are deeply

[^2]: " Daily Chronicle





**[p. 561]**

Yesterday I had a long talk with the General on the subject (Ed- ward is very ill with a bad throat)—and we both agreed, that you, as foreign Secretary of the 'Parti', must send a line to the Chronicle. The delay you can easily explain by the fact that you have been visiting your constituents and Fourmies. You should write—if that is the fact—that M. A. Smith speaks only for the Possibilists 3 who are the reactionary party and represent—you know what. That the Parti Ouvrier attended the 1st demonstration of the Legal Eight Hours Committee, that although it could send no delegate, it was at one with that Committee last year, and (this we all hope) that your Party will be represented on our platforms this year. The Possibilists are sending 2 delegates. Surely you could send one. Could not Delec- luze come? It would cost very little to come from Calais? And you could also nominate Bonnier. Those 2 (I know you can't come) would counterbalance the others.

In any case, my dear Paul, you must write a line to the Chronicle (or better still let Laura write it!) and copy that and send it, with further details if need be, to the Workman's Times. But this must be done at once.

Yours,

Tussy

Why don't you get your Verriers* to join the International Bottle- makers' Society? Their not doing so is a great pity—and 'tis only 4d. (8 sous!) per annum per member!!

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 38, , . .. . , ,„„. Published in English lor the hrst Moscow, 1965 . &

[^2]: time

[^3]: 1 glassworkers



