---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "1. Marx to Engels. After 11 January "
Page_Range: "40-42"
---

# 1. Marx to Engels. After 11 January 



**[p. 3]**

18 60

1

MARX TO ENGELS

IN. MANCHESTER l

[London, after 11 January 1860]

11 January 1860

Dear Marx,

Today I am sending you, under separate cover, a copy of the supplement to No. 349 of last year's Kölnische Zeitung.

The Wilhelm Joseph Reiff mentioned therein as having a warrant out against him for "immoral conduct" is, so I am told, none other than the Reiff who appeared at the trial of the Communists in Cologne and who is presently over here and living off the party.

I had never received the said 'Reiff' at my house because the fellow was suspect, and more than suspect, on account of his conduct at the communist trial,2 whereas the 'fat rhymester'" had taken him under his protection and saddled Liebknecht with him. Since then, the fellow has been living off Liebknecht, the Laplander,15 Lessner, Schröder, etc., and other poor devils, besides having the hat passed round at the Workers' Society,3 etc.

The above letter from Freiligrath is all the news of the Teuton that I have had since the great retreat.4 And what an absurd letter it is. How grotesque the grandeur behind which there lurks the

[^1]: Now I have written to Reiff today (care of Liebknecht, not knowing how else to get in touch with him), informing him that I can no longer take any interest in him—that I forbid him to continue to use me as a reference—and that I will not tolerate his visits!

[^2]: Thus, for my part, I have acted as I thought fit. What attitude the party will wish to adopt towards this dirty business is its own affair. You are now in possession of the facts!

[^3]: Your

[^4]: F. Freiligrath

[^5]: a Freiligrath - b Anders



Next Monday I have to pay a £1 instalment at the Marylebone COUNTY-COURT.7 At the same time, I have received from the Westminster COUNTY-COURT (ON BEHALF OF A BAKER) the enclosed scrap of paper, which you must return to me. What I foresaw is coming to pass. No sooner has one philistine found his way to the COUNTY-COURT than he is followed by another. If things go on like this, I really don't know how I can keep my head above water. What is so disastrous about these constant interruptions is that I simply cannot get on with my work.8

The review in the Darmstadt Militär-Zeitung is most WELCOME.9 Your recent pamphlet3 has assured you a position as a military critic in Germany. As soon as you get the opportunity, you must publish something under your own name, adding beneath it 'Author of Po and Rhine'. Our rascally enemies shall see BY and BY that we're able simply to impress the public without first seeking permission from it or its Betas.

In my view, the most momentous thing happening in the world today is the slave movement—on the one hand, in America, started by the death of Brown,10 and in Russia, on the other. You will have read that the aristocracy in Russia literally threw themselves into constitutional agitation and that two or three members of leading families have already found their way to Siberia." At the same time, Alexander has displeased the peasants, for the recent manifesto declares outright that, with emancipation, 'THE COMMUNISTIC PRINCIPLE' must be abandoned.b Thus, a 'social' movement has been started both in the West and in the East. Together with the impending DOWNBREAK in Central Europe, this promises great things.

I have just seen in the Tribune that there's been another slave revolt in Missouri, which was put down, needless to say.12 But the

[^1]: a Po and Rhine - b This refers to the item 'Progress and Final Issue of the Peasantry Question. A Memorial submitted to the consideration of the Chief Peasantry Question Committee by the President, Adjutant-General Rostoffzeff in The Daily Telegraph, No. 1417, 11 January 1860.



