---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "2. Mar x to Bertalan Szemere. 12 January "
Page_Range: "42-43"
---

# 2. Mar x to Bertalan Szemere. 12 January 



**[p. 5]**

signal has now been given. Should the affair grow serious BY and BY, what will become of Manchester?

Leonard Horner has resigned his post. His last brief report is replete with bitter irony.'1 Could you possibly find out whether the Manchester MILL-OWNERS had a hand in his resignation?

It appears from the 'FACTORY INSPECTORS' REPORTS' (of '1855'-'1859 first six months') that, since 1850, industry in England has made miraculous progress. The state of health of the workers (ADULTS) has improved since your Condition of the Working-Class (which I have reread at the Museumb), whereas that of the children (mortality) has deteriorated.

Salut.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

2

MARX TO BERTALAN SZEMERE

London, 12 January 1860

My dear Sir,

Thanks for the point you have in my affair.1S This letter has been delayed, because I had entered into negotiations, on behalf of your publication, with a publisher who, having put me off from day to day, withdrew at last.14

Bentley is not your man. Try once with John Murray. In writing to those fellows, never forget to sign as ancient Minister. This is something with those flunkeys.

Yours truly

A. W.'

Your

K. M.

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: a Report of Leonard Horner, Esq., Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year ended the ßlst

[^3]: October 1859, dated 14 November 1859, in Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, for the Half Year Ending S 1st October 1859, London, 1860. - b the British Museum Library - c A. Williams, an alias used by Marx in some of his letters.



