---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "3. Marx to Engels. 25 January "
Page_Range: "43-44"
---

# 3. Marx to Engels. 25 January 



**[p. 6]**

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Revue d'histoire com- parée, t. IV, No. 1-2, Budapest, 1946

3

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 January 1860

Dear Engels,

Have you already heard about Vogt's pamphlet,3 in which there are the most horrible scurrilities concerning me? And, what is more, the thing is being jubilantly acclaimed by the Teutonicb

bourgeoisie. The first edition has already been sold out. Yesterday, a LEADER in the National-Zeitung contained a long defamatory passage from it.c (Any chance of your laying hands on this particular number of the Nat.-Zeit.} I haven't been able to get hold of it here.) Now, what ought I to do? Mr Lassalle would seem to have taken such umbrage at my last letter that there hasn't been a word from him since.15

I should be grateful if you could have an article READY for Friday or Saturday0 (there is a ship sailing via Cork).

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - b Marx uses the archaic form 'teutschen' instead of the standard 'deutschen' (German, Germanic). - c 'Karl Vogt und die Allgemeine Zeitung', National-Zeitung, No. 37, 22 January 1860. - d 27 and 28 January



