---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "4. Engels to Marx. 26 January "
Page_Range: "44-46"
---

# 4. Engels to Marx. 26 January 



**[p. 4]**

ENGELS TO MARX16

IN LONDON

Manchester, 26 January 1860

Dear Moor,

Tomorrow being Tribune day,17 I'm sorry that there should again be no material to hand; the few notes on Morocco in The Times" don't even run to the engagement at Cabo-Negro,18 nor has anything else happened. However, you'll have enough material with the parliamentary stuff.1' I am still waiting to hear about the reform of the Prussian army as well.19

Your opinion of the importance of the slave movement in America and Russia1 is already being confirmed. The Harpers- Ferry affair,'" with its sequel in Missouri,12 is bearing fruit. Everywhere the free NIGGERS'1 in the South are being hounded out of the states, and I have just seen from the first New York cotton report (W. P. Wright & Co of 10 January 1860)e that the planters HURRIED their cotton ON TO EHE PORTS IN ORDER TO GUARD AGAINST ANY PROBABLE

CONSEQUENCES ARISING OUI OE THE HARPERS-FERRY AFFAIR. I n R u s s i a , t OO, t h e confusion is growing admirably; the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung's St. Petersburg correspondent is very good on this subject, though he pays more attention to the constitutional movement among the aristocracy,' which, however, also provides a certain impetus for the peasants, of course.

In India we have the makings of a tremendous crisis. As far as the views of the local philistines on the subject are concerned, CONFER the enclosed MARKET REPORTS. NOW yarn prices are mostly so high, almost higher than the peak in 1857, and yet cotton is 2'7s to 2 V2d cheaper. Twenty-six new mills are under construction in Burnley alone, and a proportionate number in other places.

[^1]: 11 'Spain and Morocco', The Times, Nos. 23523, 23524 and 23526, 23, 24 and 26 January 1860. - h See Marx's article 'English Politics' in Vol. 17 of the present edition. - c See this volume, p. 4. - d Engels, who uses the English word, may have been unaware of its racist connotations. - e 'Commercial Matters', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5839, 11 January 1860. - ' 'Zur russischen Leibeigenschaftsfrage und die Finanz-Verhältnisse des Staats', Allgemeine Zeitung, Nos. 3 and 5 (supplement), 3 and 5 January 1860; 'Die Bauern-Emancipation in Russland', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 16 (supplement), 16 January 1860; 'Die russische Leibeigenschaft und der Adel', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 18 (supplement), 18 January 1860.





**[p. 1913]**

Already these idiotic English believe that they will shortly inundate. France.20 A jackass of a calico printer—ONE OE THE SHARPEST—says that, with a 30% protective tariff in France, the business he could do there would be 15% more profitable than on any other market. The fool imagines that monopoly prices will continue to obtain in France, even if the monopoly is abolished. It has occurred to no one that the whole thing is a piece of sharp practice, the aim being to get at John Bull where he is notoriously vulnerable, and ultimately to fleece him good and proper.

Who, actually, is the Mr Fischel who wrote the Duke of Coburg'sa pamphlet for him21 and now writes for The Free Press} Even from the excerpts from his pamphlet I could see that the Coburg chap has Urquhartite LEANINGS.

Dronke is now in Liverpool and holds a very good agency for a Franco-Spanish copper mining company—£500 guaranteed and the possibility of earning up to £1,000, or so I'm told. Garnier-Pagès got it for him. He comes here quite often, but always steers clear of me, sending me his regards post festum.

Lupus has had a bad bout of bronchitis but is better now though still very anxious about himself and not yet fully recovered. Once again he has so arranged inatters as to be in a chronic state of strife with his LANDLADY.

I have a great deal to do at the office just now, hence the irregularity of my correspondence. Nor, for the time being, do I see that anything can be done about this excessive drudgery unless, as I hope, there is a crisis.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Many regards to your wife and the YOLNG LADIES.h.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a Ernst II - '' Marx's daughters—Jenny, Laura and Eleanor



