---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "7. Engels to Marx. 31 January "
Page_Range: "50-52"
---

# 7. Engels to Marx. 31 January 



**[p. 7]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 31 January 1860

Dear Moor,

I intend to write to Ephraim Artful'1 tomorrow; a diplomatic missive such as this ought not to be sent off without due reflection. For a day or two now, I have been mulling over Savoy, Nice and the Rhine, a kind of sequel to Po and Rhine. I have made up my mind to offer the thing to Duncker; it won't be more than 2 sheets long and might provide a good pretext for getting in touch with Ephraim. At all events, I shall write the thing in the course of next week, after which I shall immediately send the manuscript to Beruh. Apart from one or two matters concerning the French revolutionary campaigns in Nice and Savoy, no preparatory work is called for, so it will be soon done.

Obviously Mr Vogt must be given a thorough lambasting; but it's difficult to say anything until we know what the fellow has actually published.'1 At all events, you might just as well use Fischel as anyone else, provided he really does have connections.' Moreover, little Jew Braund will now see that the significance of your statementc and of the whole set-to between Vogt and the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung*' is of quite a different order to what the Berlin philistine at first imagined. As things stand, we must maintain all these connections, while the conspiration du silence and other intrigues, to which we must meanwhile turn a blind eye, will subsequently release us from all obligations as soon as some crisis necessitates a breach on genuinely political grounds.

As to the chances of a fresh set-to, I am entirely of your opinion.' But I believe that if, despite Vogt and Co., we are to keep our end up so far as the public is concerned, we shall have to do it through our scientific work. We haven't the money to organise the émigré press and several times we have seen that an émigré paper or German pamphlets printed in London never

[^1]: a Ferdinand Lassalle - '• This refers to Carl Vogt s pamphlet, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - ' See this volume, p. 10. - d Lassalle - c K. Marx, 'Declaration', 15 November 1859. - ' See this volume, p. 9.





**[p. 14]**

Mr Orges has issued a pur personal statementb which reveals who this queer fish is. Originally a Prussian lieutenant of artillery at the military college in Berlin (1845-48), at the same time, he pursued his studies and obtained his doctorate; he left the service in March 1'848 (his application to resign is dated 19 March '48) and went to Schleswig-Holstein where he joined the artillery; in 1850, he joined the crew of a merchant vessel, in which he 'served' and sailed round the world; in 1851, he attended the Exhibition in London,39 which he reported for the A. A. Z.; he was then consorting with Schimmelpfennig, Willich, Techow, etc., and, subsequently, became the A. A. Z.'s military editor. At all events, there's more to the man than anyone else on the paper, which he has set on its feet again. The leaders I attributed to Heilbronner are all by him. Nevertheless, I'll still be able to deal with him good and proper.

[^1]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - h See this volume, p. 10.



