---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "8. Marx to Engels. 31 January "
Page_Range: "52-54"
---

# 8. Marx to Engels. 31 January 



**[p. 15]**

Many regards,

Your

F. E.

The Prussians have approached my old man b with the intention of confiscating my assets to the tune of 1,005 talers, 20 [silver groschen] 6 pfennigs40 because of my alleged desertion from the Landwehr.41 My old man told them that he had no access to my assets, whereupon they calmed down. I am to be sentenced on 18 February.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original, sehen F. Engeis und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart 1913 Published m English for the first time

8

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 31 January 1860

Dear Engels,

Your articlec received. Very good. Herewith a letter from Lassalle which arrived yesterday and to which I replied immediately, if briefly.d Only a pamphlet written by us jointly will get us out of this business. I have also written secretly to Fischel in Berlin, asking whether it is feasible to bring a libel suit against the National-Zeitung.*2 Vogt's piecee (not to be had at any booksellers in London; he has sent it neither to Freiligrath nor to Kinkel, nor to any of his other acquaintances over here. Obviously he wished to steal a march on us. I have thus had to order it) is, so far as we are concerned, clearly a de la Hodde-Chenusian concoction.34 I have read the second article in

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: 3 See this volume, p. 9. - b Friedrich Engels, Sr., Frederick Engels' father - c 'Savoy and Nice' - d See this volume, pp. 11-12. - e Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859.





**[p. 1913]**

Yesterday I saw Freiligrath for a moment. I approached him very ceremoniously (i-f he has the slightest sense of honour he must make an anti-Vogt statement), and all our entreviewb

amounted to was the following: 'I: I've come to ask you to lend me the pamphlet on the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung lawsuit which I've been seeking in vain at all the booksellers and must certainly have been sent you by your friend Vogt. F. (very melodramatically): Vogt is not my friend. /: Lassalle has written to me that I must reply at once. You haven't got the pamphlet, then? F. No. /: Good evening.' (He held out his honest right hand and shook mine Westphalian-fashion.) Voilà tout.1

I was assured by Juch (owner and present editor of the Hermann, whose acquaintance I made in connection with the Stieber affair and Eichhoff's trial44 in Berlin), that Kinkel hadn't yet had a copy from Vogt either. This same Juch had, however, been sent numerous Vogtian tirades against us which he did not print. This chap—who is, incidentally, quite honest in his own way—has got to be kept mellow for the time being. Since only the Hermann is now appearing in London, it would have been dreadful to have to confront Vogt's gang unarmed, here on our own ground.

Apropos! As a result of my first meeting with Juch,d on my advice, Eichhoff cited friend Hirsch, who is doing time in Hamburg for forgery, as a witness for the defence. Consequently, the trial, due to begin on 26 January (I read about this in the Publicist), was again adjourned after a heated argument. Stieber has now done with Hirsch.

K. M. Imandt has just told me that Heise is dead.

[^1]: Salut. Y o u l

[^2]: First published in Der Briefiveclisel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a 'Wie man radikale Flugblätter macht', National-Zeitung, No. 41, 25 January 1860. - b Thus in the original. - ' That's all. - d in December 1859, after the 13th



