---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "11. Engels to Marx. 2 February "
Page_Range: "56-58"
---

# 11. Engels to Marx. 2 February 



**[p. 19]**

ascendant and things in that city must look almost as they did after the peace of Basle.49 There's no reasoning with such people. Lassalle seems to excrete this paltry, niggling pap as naturally as his turds, and maybe a good deal more easily—what answer can one give to such inanities and facile wisdom! Extraordinary advice, the chap doles out!

Let's wait until we've got the pamphlet,3 and in the meantime cast round for somewhere to print and someone to publish our riposte. If possible, Germany and the opposing party's headquar- ters, Berlin. The business of the 3,000 copies is plainly a lie of Vogt's.50 However, there's scandal enough and to spare. I shall go and see Lupus today and tell him to rack his brains for all the material he can lay hands on concerning Vogt. In the meantime, I shall sort through the papers dealing with 1850/52 and you must look out our old manuscript about the émigrés.b So far, I have no idea of what the fellow actually says.

Regards to the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, . . moo Published in English tor the hrst Moscow, 1929 . &

11

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 2 February 1860

Dear Moor,

Conferred with Lupus last night. It was only while reading Lassalle's letter' out to him that I became fully aware not only of the chap's philistinism and arrogance, but also of his 'method'. Even in the paltriest of trifles, the fellow is Absolute Spirit Old Hegelian style and, just as he proposes in economics to assume the

[^1]: time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - h K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - c See this volume, pp. 16 and 19.





**[p. 20]**

role of a higher unity between you and the economists, the finite contradiction,51 so too he is already assuming the role of a higher unity between you and Vogt. Yours, the 'principle', Vogt's the 'Italian policy'52—and very nice too! What egregious schoolmaster presumption to start off by telling us we should declare Vogt hadn't been bribed, and then to proceed to take seriously, and thus reduce to absurdity, the one good joke in Fröbel's state- ment!53

Lupus wonders whether, under Prussian law, the National- Zeitung mightn't be compelled to accept a statement from you. I, too, believe the Press Law contains some such article. IF SO, we should invoke it immediately on receipt of the pamphlet"; for, as Lassalle rightly remarks, habent sua fata libellib; what that will be in the pamphlet's case one cannot tell, and the quicker the rejoinder, the surer will be its effect.

Quoadc our pamphlet, we are at a disadvantage in being personally on the defensive and unable to return lies for lies. Then there's another disadvantage—namely, that the public= Philistia already detests us in advance, for while we do not actually stand convicted of odium generis humani,d we are guilty of odium generis bourgeois,5 and that amounts to exactly the same thing.

On the other hand, we are at an advantage in being able to provide an exposé of our Italian policy which puts the matter on a totally different plane, leaves aside the personal aspect and places us in a favourable position, not perhaps in the eyes of the Berlin liberals, but in those of the greater part of Germany, in that we stand for the popular, national side. The Savoy affair in particular is something of a godsend to us.54

Now it seems to me that, as soon as the pamphlet arrives (couldn't Lass, send it by post?), you should pack your bags and come up here, when we can decide once and for all what to do and how and where. I should gladly seize on the opportunity to come to London, but, as your wife is to be kept in the dark, it would be better if you were to come up here, the more so since, if any work is to be done, I couldn't stay so long in London. Another thing to be decided is whether I should appear on the title page; there's only one reason I can see against it, which, however, seems to me quite conclusive; but we'll discuss that when we meet.

[^1]: a C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - b Books have their fate (Terentianus Maurus, De litteris, syllabis et metris, 'Carmen heroicum', 258). - c As regards - d hatred of the human race - e hatred of the bourgeois



