---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "12. Marx to Engels. 3 February "
Page_Range: "58-60"
---

# 12. Marx to Engels. 3 February 



**[p. 21]**

It is extraordinary that I should have first learned of Heise's death via Dundee' and London. After all, the little chapd was here last Thursday or Friday and came to see me. I was out, however, and he also missed me at the club that evening. But, if he'd known about it, he'd surely have got someone else to tell me, as he usually does. He saw Charles,'' too.

Salut.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

12

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 3 February 1860

Dear Engels,

After one minor alteration, or rather the deletion of one sentence, C. D. Collet yesterday declared himself willing, but, at the same time, said that, as Urquhart was the actual editor, he must first submit the thing to him, which means a delay of 24 hours.55 Collet admitted that I could, of course, publish the statement malgré eux,1 but, if it was done the way he suggested, I could subsequently, TO A CERTAIN DEGREE, fall back on him and Urq. WEIL. I conceded this and intend to see what Father U. has to say. (For the sequel see immediately below.)

Incidentally, it's no go either with a pamphlet or a statement in the newspapers—just now. The pamphlet would BE KILLED by the self-same press WHICH NOW TRUMPETS THE GRANDEUR OF VOGT. The latter's

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine. - b See this volume, p. 13. - c A reference to Peter Imandt, who lived in' Dundee, Scotland. See this volume, p. 16. - d Ernst Dronke - e Charles Roesgen - f despite them





**[p. 22]**

which I have got, I have already discovered items so actionable as to bring about its immediate undoing in a legal sense.c This lawsuit will be the peg on which we can hang the whole of our riposte to the public at large in court. Later on, we can turn our attention to that bastard Vogt.

When you consider that in a week or two, in connection with Stieber, the Cologne communist trial2 will be re-enacted all over again,44 this vile attack could, if skilfully exploited, help rather than hinder us, for this will AT ONCE enable us to state our case forcefully to the mass of the workers.

On the other hand, what evidence can Vogt or the National- Zeitung produce against us? At the most, there is Techow's gossip56 and, perhaps (in THE WORST CASE), some' not altogether pleasant reviews by Liming57 but, these apart, the fact that Vogt knows nothing of conditions here and makes the most absurd mistakes is apparent if only from his article in the Biel Handels-Courier.d

So my plan is this: Next week, as soon as Vogt's rubbishe arrives, I shall come and visit you for a few days in order to talk the whole thing over.58 As to the costs of the action, Dronke (who, by the by, owes me money) must also bear his share. (Whatever happens you must come here a few days at Easter.)

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 15. - b 'Wie man radikale Flugblätter macht', National-Zeitung, No. 41, 25 January 1860. - c See this volume, pp. 40-45. - d [K. Vogt,] 'Zur Warnung', Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150 (extraordinary supplement), 2 June 1859. - e C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859.



