---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "15. Marx to Engels. 4 February "
Page_Range: "63-64"
---

# 15. Marx to Engels. 4 February 



**[p. 26]**

could be very useful to us in the Vogt rumpus; he has masses of connections.

Many regards to the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

15

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 February 1860

Dear Engels,

Nothing from Berlin yet.11 If Izzy weren't a knave, incidentally, he would have sent me the National-Zeitung of his own accord, if nothing else, as soon as it came out.

Now, as regards the extract from the N.-Z. for Lupus,1' what I wrote, on the first occasion, was from memory and was not intended as a basis for a public statement. On the second occasion, I was copying, and to avoid misunderstanding, am doing so again. I can't send the original as I haven't a second one to spare.

Extract from No. 41 of the N.-Z., dated 25 January. (It is the concluding passage in the LEADER):

I have carefully gone through all the old letters and newspapers and put on one side what we may need 'in due course'. You must

[^1]: 'Only one further thing is worthy of note: The open letter to the National Association immediately fell into the hands of the Hanoverian reactionary party and was made known by this last; in 1850 another "circular" (as Vogt recollects, written by Parliamentary Wolff alias Casemate Wolff) was sent from London to the "proletarians" in Germany, and simultaneously allowed to fall into the hands of the Hanoverian police.'

[^2]: No answer as yet from that bloody Urquhart.c

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 12 and 22. - b This refers to the item 'Wie man radikale Flugblätter macht', National-Zeitung, No. 41, 25 January 1860. - <: See this volume, p. 21.



