---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "17. Engels to Marx. 7 February "
Page_Range: "65-66"
---

# 17. Engels to Marx. 7 February 

K. Marx

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published in English for the first time

17

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 February 1860

Dear Moor,

Received the circular addressed to Collet.a Comes altogether à propos, yesterday's Daily Telegraph having carried two columns about Vogt's shitb and the Brimstone Gang.65 If it amounts to no more than what's in the Telegr., then Izzy has been frightened by a fart. To 'parry the thrust', all one has to do is hold one's nose.

Mr Ronge is up here. He hurried along to Siebel, saying he wished to be introduced to me!! Furthermore, he asked whether I also belonged to the Brimstone Gang—IN FACT, if it weren't for him, S., and if it weren't for S., I myself, wouldn't have heard about the nonsense in the Telegr.

S., who's an out-and-out charlatan and'knows it, is dead keen to be of service to us in this business. He's got masses of connections and, best of all, is quite above suspicion. The fellow knows that the whole robber band, Kinkel and Co., are just as much humbugs as he is, and in us he has at last found people who are totally impervious to his humbug, indec an unbounded admiration.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette.' - b [K. Abel,] 'The Journalistic Auxiliaries of Austria', The Daily Telegraph, No. 1439, 6 February 1860. See also this volume, pp. 74-76. - c hence



