---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "18. Marx to Engels. 7 February "
Page_Range: "66-67"
---

# 18. Marx to Engels. 7 February 



**[p. 29]**

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

18

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 February 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, etc.

Dear Engels,

Of the COPIES despatched to you,a send 1 to Dronke, 1 to Dr Bronner in Bradford. I have sent one to Borchardt myself.

The D. T. (Daily Telegraph), Monday's issue, p. 5, contained a filthy article (IN FACT, from Berlin, but dated Frankfurt a. M.)b

based on the two in the National-Zeitung. I instantly threatened the dogs with a LIBEL action ,c and they will open their traps and apologise.

Letters from Fischel (there's another way of bringing a lawsuit, which actually involves no money), Lassalle (absurd in the extreme), Schily (interesting), etc. More details tomorrow.

I now have to pay the printing costs (will be ABOUT £\), £1 to be paid next Monday at the COUNTY-COURT, and shall need something, partly to get to Manchester with and partly so as to leave a modicum here. At the same time, before departing hence, I shall have to make, and get others to make, all manner of AFFIDAVITS.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette'. - b [K. Abel,] 'The Journalistic Auxiliaries of Austria', The Daily Telegraph, No. 1439, 6 February 1860. See also this volume, pp. 74-76. - ' K. Marx, 'To the Editor of The Daily Telegraph'.

[^2]: 3*



