---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "19. Mar x to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 8 February "
Page_Range: "67-69"
---

# 19. Mar x to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 8 February 



**[p. 30]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Statements" sent off yesterday to Nat.-Zeit., Kölnische Zeitung, Volks-Zeitung, Publicist (Berlin), Reform, Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, Frankfurter Journal. The statement was a brief one. Firstly, that I shall take legal proceedings against the N.-Z.; secondly, a reference to the English anti-Blind 'LIBEL'b enslosed with the statement.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

19

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

London, 8 February 1860 9 Graf ton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Freiligrath,

As an old party friend and an old personal friend, I consider it my duty to keep you informed of the steps I have taken in the furtherance of the Berlin lawsuit, by reason of which they must soon, though not immediately, become known to the public.

sent you that, besides Hollinger's written statement, Blind cited that of certain compositor, Wiehe, in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung" (etc.) as evidence that I had been guilty of 'a plain

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: You will recall or have seen from the printed English circularb

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editors of the Volks-Zeitung. Declaration'. - b K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette'. - c K. Blind's statement in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 313, 9 November 1859. See this volume, pp. 60-62.





**[p. 31]**

It would, I think, be superfluous were I at this point to add a single word of comment to the document.

Your

K. M.

'One of the first days of November last—I do not recollect the exact date—in the evening between 9 and 10 o'clock I was taken out of bed by Mr F. Hollinger, in whose house (3, Litchfield Street, Soho) I was then living, and by whom I was employed as compositor. He presented to me a paper to the effect that I had been continuously employed by him during the1 preceding 11 months, and that during all that time a certain German flysheet "Zur Warnung" (A Warning) had not been composed and printed in Mr Hollinger's Office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho. In my perplexed state,—and not aware of the importance of the transaction I complied with his wish, and copied and signed the document. He promised me money, but I never received anything. During that transaction Mr Charles Blind, as my wife told me at the time, was waiting in Mr Hollinger's room. A few days later Mrs Hollinger (Mr F. Hollinger's wife) called me down from dinner and led me into her husband's room, where I found Mr Charles Blind alone. He presented me the same paper which Mr Hollinger had presented me before, and entreated me to write and sign a second copy, as he wanted two, the one for himself, the other for publication in the Press. He added that he would show himself grateful to me. I copied and signed again the paper.

[^1]: 'I herewith declare the truth of the above statements and that: '1. During the eleven months, mentioned in the document, I was for six weeks not employed by Mr Hollinger, but by a Mr Ermani.

[^2]: '2. I did not work in Mr Hollinger's Office just at the time, when the flysheet "Zur Warnung" (A Warning) was published.

[^3]: '3. 1 heard at the time from Mr Voegele, who then worked for Mr Hollinger, that he, Voegele, had together with Mr Hollinger himself composed the flysheet in question, and that the manuscript was in Mr Blind's handwriting.

[^4]: '4. The types of the pamphlet- were still standing, when I returned into Mr Hollinger's service. I myself broke them into columns for the reprint of the flysheet (or pamphlet) "Zur Warnung" (A Warning) in the German paper "Das Volk", published at London by Mr Fidelio Hollinger, 3 Litchfield Street, Soho. The flysheet appeared in No. 7, d. d. 18 June 1859 of "Das Volk".

[^5]: '5. I saw Mr Hollinger give to Mr William Liebknecht, of 14, Church Street, Soho, London, the proofsheet of the pamphlet "Zur Warnung", on which proofsheet Mr Charles Blind with his own hand had corrected 4 or 5 mistakes. Mr Hollinger hesitated at first giving the proofsheet to Mr Liebknecht, and when



