---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "20. Marx to Engels. 9 February "
Page_Range: "69-75"
---

# 20. Marx to Engels. 9 February 



**[p. 32]**

'Johann Friedrich Wiehe.

'Declared and signed by the said Johann Friedrich Police Court Wiehe at the Police Court Bow Street, London, this Royal Coat of Arms 8th day of February, 1860, before me Th.a Henry. Bow Streetc

Magistrate of the said Court.'1'

I would beg you, for the time being, not to show this copy of the affidavit to anyone. What the consequences would be under English criminal law will not escape you.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

20

MARX TO ENGELSfi7

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 February 1860

Dear Engels,

To have offered your pamphletd at two louis d'or per sheet is SHAMEFUL. Pamphlets of this kind ought to be sold, not by the sheet, but as a whole. Even 40 talers per sheet would be too little. Incidentally, Campe is better than Duncker. The publishere who brings out the Darmstadt Militär-Zeitung1 would gladly take the pamphlet, too. Actually, the main thing is that it should come out quickly and, if I were you, I would settle this matter, at least, by telegraph with that louse, Duncker.'i8

I have been IN A SECRET and CONFIDENTIAL CORRESPONDENCE with ' The Daily Telegraph' since the day the shitg appeared. For before making amende honorable, the fellow h—I was as rude as hell to him

[^1]: a J' in the manuscript. 'Th' is correct. - b Marx gives the document in English. - 1 Marx drew a circle round the words representing the stamp. - d F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine. - e Eduard Zernin - f Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung - « [K. Abel,] 'The Journalistic Auxiliaries of Austria', The Daily Telegraph, No. 1439, 6 February 1860. See this volume, pp. 74-76. - h the Editor of The Daily Telegraph





**[p. 33]**

FROM F R A N K F O R T - O N - T H E - M A I N , BUT WHICH WAS IN FACT INDITED AT B E R L I N , IS

NOTHING BUT A CLUMSY AMPLIFICATION OF TWO LEADERS ETC. ETC.' i n t h e B e r l i n National-Zeitungï T h e writer, i.e. The Daily Telegraph's swine of a Berlin correspondent, is a Jew by the name of Meier,70 a relative of the CITY-PROPRIETOR'S who is an English Jew by the name of Levy. Hence, both these fellows rightly accuse Heine—juvante d Vogt— of being a baptised Jew. Herewith Izzy's last letter, which you should retain as a curiosity. Calls himself objective, does he? Inimitable, the plasticity of this most unhellenic of all Wasser- polack 7 1 Jews! My only reply to the fellow was an immediate announcement in the papers—including the Volks-Zeitung—to the effect that I was bringing a libel action against the N.-Z.e (In each case I enclosed the circular about Blind/ although, according to the great Izzy, I ought 'not to delude myself as to the force of that argument'.)

All this week, by the by, I've been prevented from writing anything for the Tribune. I have had to send out fifty letters at least,72 running round to see Collet and God knows who else not CONSIDERED. And on top of that there was the correspondence with the beastly Telegraph and the correspondence with the Star,8 to which I sent the whole of my correspondence with the Telegraph. T h e enclosed letter from the Star is to be put on your files. I have also written to Reynolds.42 Shall see what he does. T h e n there was the running in connection with Wiehe and going to the police. T h e result you will find below. Two replies so far to my letters to the Continent—in so far as they weren't just to newspapers. O n e from Schily. Priceless. Contains the whole Brimstone Gang 6 5 and

[^1]: a In fact it appeared on Monday, 6 February 1860. - b K. Marx, 'To the Editor of The Daily Telegraph'. - ' 'Karl Vogt und die Allgemeine Zeitung' and 'Wie man radikale Flugblätter macht', National-Zeilung, Nos. 37 and 41, 22 and 25 January 1860 respectively. - A with the help of - e K. Marx, 'To the Editors of the Volks-Zeitung. Declaration'. - ' K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette'. - 8 The Morning Star





**[p. 34]**

I have drawn up the indictment against the Nat.-Zeit, for the public prosecutor's office at the Berlin municipal court. It will go off before I come up to you. But I must wait until I have Fischel's answer with regard to the commencement and conclusion, the prescribed form of address, etc. Should I send the package (since it has to include all manner of manuscripts, documents) to Berlin by post or by PARCEL COMPANY? It should at all events be REGISTERED.

I have rummaged through everything I have here in London in the way of letters and newspapers for the period 1848-59, and sorted out and put in order what we need. Now you must get things ready so that I find everything that's available in one 'great pile' when I get to Manchester.

attended by eighty people. An indignant anti-Vogt resolution was unanimously adopted by 'the proletarians'. The beastly Hermann asked me to report on it. This I refused to do, but told them to obtain a brief account from Papa Liebknecht.

Apropos, to RETURN à nos moutons," i.e. Lassalle. Not knowing, when I got his first letter, whether you had written to him as we had originally agreed (when CIRCUMSTANCES were otherwise), I told him in a couple of lines that I had thought the only explanation for his many-month-long silence must be annoyance at my last, somewhat rude (in fact excessively rude), letter. I said that I was glad this was not the case, and also that I had informed you of my

[^1]: Well, on Monday there was the working-men's banquet,d

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 70-71 and Marx's Herr Vogt (present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 38-47). - b See Herr Vogt, present edition, Vol. 17, p. 41. - c gossip column - d See this volume, p. 11. - e The phrase'revenons à nos moutons'(literally,'to return to our sheep') occurs in a mediaeval French farce about the lawyer Patelin. In a figurative sense it means 'to return to the matter in question'.





**[p. 35]**

I immediately wrote to Blind—or perhaps, I should say, put into an envelope the circular, which affects him so very closely.b He has kept his trap shut, of course. Instead, the brute goes running around town in the hope that things can be sorted out by tittle-tattle (vide below how much good that will do him). For the past few weeks the man's been indulging in feverish activity, publishing pamphlet after pamphlet, blowing his own trumpet in the Hermann for all he's worth, sucking up, fore and aft, to the few bourgeois whose acquaintance he made on the Schiller committee,7' pressing his own candidature as secretary of the recently conceived Schiller Association,'*' now denying his 'Pat- riots',77 now making himself important in their eyes by means of semicovert, statesmanlike allusions, etc. Well, all this amounts to, as you will instantly realise, is a drowning man clutching at a straw.

No one has behaved so abjectly as that potbellied philistine Freiligrath. I sent him the circular.1' He didn't so much as

[^1]: 11 See this volume, p. 11. - h K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette'.





**[p. 36]**

But to come to essentials. Firstly, I discovered through Juch that Wiehe once committed a theft in Bremen, which was why he had to come to London. Secondly, I learnt through Schapper that Wiehe introduced himself to him as a compositor on the Volk, and it was he who had obtained the fellow's present job for him. I briefed Schapper, who quietly intimated to Wiehe that he knew about the Bremen affair, but then proceeded to read my circular aloud in the presence of his EMPLOYER and to CROSS EXAMINE him. The fellow admitted everything. What the outcome was, you will see from the following document of which I possess an officially authenticated duplicate. One is going to Berlin. The other I shall keep here and employ in no uncertain manner against the nay-sayer.d One further point. This will show you the kind of people these 'honest fellows' consort with. I had, of course, let Wiehe know that I would compensate him for the loss of half a working day, the time he would have to spend with me at the police court. When all had been done, I gave him 2/6d. He remonstrated. Well, how much a day do you earn? I asked. ABOUT 3/-, said he, but I want five from you. After all, I ought to get something for telling the truth.

But the best is yet to come. I:* You have declined the money offer made by Blind and Hollinger in order to bribe you? He: Why decline! The rogues promised, but never gave me anything.* That's compositor Wiehe for you. But Hollinger is a villain of far deeper dye. Vögele, whom I had arranged to see yesterday, did not turn up. Doubtless Blind-Hollinger made it worth his while to keep away. But

[^1]: a The word used is 'Schwefelpfuh P, perhaps by analogy with 'Schwefelbande'— Brimstone Gang. Cf. Revelation, 20:10. - b See this volume, pp. 30-32. - c K. Marx, 'Declaration', 15 November 1859. - d Karl Blind





**[p. 37]**

'One of the first days of November last—I do not recollect the exact date—in the evening between 9 and 10 o'clock I was taken out of bed by Mr F. Hollinger, in whose house I then lived, and by whom I was employed as compositor. He presented to me a paper to the effect that during the preceding 11 months I had been continuously employed by him, and that during all that time a certain German flysheet "Zur Warnung" (A Warning) had not been composed and printed in Mr Hollinger's Office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho. In my perplexed state, and not aware of the importance of the transaction, I complied with his wish, and copied, and signed the document. Mr Hollinger promised me money, but I never received anything. During that transaction Mr. Charles Blind, as my wife informed me at the time, was waiting in Mr Hollinger's room. A few days later, Mrs Hollinger called me down from dinner and led me into her husband's room, where I found Mr Charles Blind alone. He presented me the same paper which Mr Hollinger had presented me before, and entreated me to write, and sign a second copy, as he wanted two, the one for himself, and the other for publication in the Press. He added that he would show himself grateful to me. I copied and signed again the paper.

'I herewith declare—upon my oath—the truth of the above statements and that:

[^1]: '1. During the 11 months mentioned in the document I was for six months'5 not employed by Mr Hollinger, but by a Mr Ermani.

[^2]: '2. I did not work in Mr Hollinger's Office just at that time when the flysheet "Zur Warnung" was published.

[^3]: '3. r heard at the time from Mr Voegele, who then worked for Mr Hollinger, that he, Voegele, had, together with Mr Hollinger himself, composed the flysheet in question, and that the manuscript was in Mr Blind's handwriting.

[^4]: '4. The types of the pamphlet were still standing when I returned to Mr Hollinger's service. I myself broke them into columns for the reprint of the flysheet "Zur Warnung" in the German paper "Das Volk" published at London, by Mr Fidelio Hollinger, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho. The flysheet appeared in No. 7, d. d. 18th June, 1859, of "Das Volk".

[^5]: '5. I saw Mr Hollinger give to Mr William Liebknecht, of 14, Church Street, Soho, London, the proof sheet of the pamphlet "Zur Warnung", on which proofsheet Mr Charles Blind with his own hand had corrected 4 or 5 mistakes. Mr Hollinger hesitated at first giving the proofsheet to Mr Liebknecht, and when Mr Liebknecht had withdrawn, he, F. Hollinger, expressed to me and my fellow workman Voegele his regret for having given the proofsheet out of his hands.

[^6]: Johann Friedrich Wiehe Police Court, Bow Streetc

[^7]: a to the matter in hand - b The original of the letter says 'six weeks'. See this volume, p. 31, and also p. 129 in Vol. 17 of the present edition. - c Marx drew a circle round the words representing the stamp.



