---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "21. Engels to Marx. 9 February "
Page_Range: "75-76"
---

# 21. Engels to Marx. 9 February 



**[p. 38]**

I deliberately brought the matter before Henry, he being the GOVERNMENTS MAGISTRATE who attends to all the political cases. T h e brand of English found in the above is not my responsibility, unlike the precise enumeration of the FACTS. WHAT DO YOU SAY NOW, SIR! 'The argument lacks force', says Izzy. Vivec Izzy! For CONSPIRACY against myself, combined with ATTEMPT AT BRIBERY OF WITNESSES, SO the MAGISTRATE says, I could now get Mr Blind r u n out of town. So much for petty bourgeois artfulness!

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

time

21

ENGELS T O MARX

[Manchester,] 9 February 1860

Dear Moor,

So the Telegraph is going to apologise?' Most gratifying; u p till today nothing has appeared.

I am very much looking forward to hearing further details. Make sure that Wiehe and Vögele don't slip out of your hands. Cela se pourrait1; when a few pounds are being offered, there is always the fear that something of the kind may happen.

Enclosed fiver D/M 34115, Manchester, 4 January 1859; if it's not enough, let me know and I'll send you another £ or two.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: As soon as I have Dronke's address, he shall receive a copy. Meanwhile, one will go off today to Dr Bronner. d

[^3]: a 'J' in the manuscript. 'Th' is correct. - b Marx quotes the document in English. - c Long live - d Engels means Marx's statement 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette'. See this volume, p. 29. - e See this volume, pp. 32-33. - f It would be quite possible



