---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "22. Engels to Marx. 12 February "
Page_Range: "76-77"
---

# 22. Engels to Marx. 12 February 



**[p. 39]**

Because of the office boys I don't care to send out to the P[OSTAL] 0[RDER] OFFICE unnecessarily and hence would rather put it off until I'm able to lay hands on another fiver. However, you can send your wife the money from here,79 or else have it beforehand, comme il te plaira."

Still no sign either of the National-Zeitungh or of Vogtc? I'm leaving now and intend to finish at least the rough draft of the manuscriptd today and tomorrow.

Vale.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

22

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 12 February 1860

Dear Moor,

You will have had the £5, or at least I hope so. The Wiehe document.' is most welcome. Après ça1 our shinish- ter R Blind will doubtless tuck his tail between his legs. In the meantime, you have, I trust, obtained one from Vögele.78 The more evidence the better.

So, the Kölnische Zeitung has, after all, published your de- claration11 and, at the same time, taken another swipe at Blind? So much the better.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: n as you wish - b This refers to the issues containing the items 'Karl Vogt und die Allgemeine Zeitung' and 'Wie.man radikale Flugblätter macht', Nos 37 and 41, 22 and 25 January 1860. - c C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - d F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine- e See this volume, p. 37. - f After that - 8 Engels writes 'finschtre' (instead of 'finstre'), presumably mimicking Blind's articulation. - h K. Marx, 'To the Editors of the Volks-Zeitung. Declaration'.



