---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "24. Marx to Engels. 13 February "
Page_Range: "83-84"
---

# 24. Marx to Engels. 13 February 



**[p. 24]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 February 1860

DEAR FREDERICK,

The booka arrived today. Nothing but shit. Sheer tripe. Luckily, the worthy National-Zeitung has reprinted in its two leaders (No. 37 and No. 41) all the passages which are actionable and in which all the scurrilities are concentrated.

Today (on receiving a second letter from Fischel), I at once sent Legal Counsellor Weber (the leading lawyer in Berlin) an indictment together with a retaining fee of 15 talers (£2 10sh).b

The case would have cost me nothing if, instead of instituting a private action for libel, I had had recourse to the Royal Prussian Public Prosecutor, but as I wrote and told Fischel,c I could not expect the Royal Prussian Public Prosecutor to 'display especial zeal in upholding the honour of my name'. Moreover, the whole procedure costs very little.

Of the £5 you sent me, £2 10 has therefore gone to Weber, £1 today to the COUNTY-COURT, 5/—to Vögele and 2/—on the two AFFIDAVITS he maded; also a LOT on stamps for letters. Before going to the CITY today I had to borrow a further £1 from a baker, repayable on Wednesday.

Luckily, Urquhart has written Collet a rude letter in which he lashes out at him for sending me the PRINTER'S BILL.82 This (i.e. my publication) was, he said, an expense chargeable to his agitational activities. So I don't have to pay him.

Tomorrow I shall be faced with yet another expense and I don't know how I'm going to meet it. For I have got to call on that bastard Zimmermann (from Spandau, a Vogtian and, at the same time, an advocate to the Austrian Embassy) so that he can supply me with the wording for the power of attorney which must go off to Weber without delay. There's no time to be lost, you see, because actions of this kind become 'statute-barred' remarkably quickly in Prussia.

[^1]: a C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - b See this volume, pp. 40-45. - c ibid., p. 40. - d ibid., p. 37.



