---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "25. Marx to Engels. 14 February "
Page_Range: "84-86"
---

# 25. Marx to Engels. 14 February 



**[p. 47]**

The Kölnische Zeitung and the N.-Z. did not publish my statement.83

Mr F. Freiligrath—whom (with seeming benevolence) I shall compromise in no mean fashion—did not even acknowledge receipt of the things I sent him.

You must surely have got my last important communication?d

After I've settled the matter of the power of attorney tomorrow, I shall leave on Wednesdaye (having notified you beforehand) for Manchester where, in addition to our indispensable meeting, I have business connected with Roberts.

You will have gathered from the foregoing that I'm now stone-broke.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

25

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 14 February 1860

Dear FREDERICK,

Enclosed COPY of Vögele's affidavit78 which I thought I had sent you on Saturday.'

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: •* 'To the Editors of the Volks-Zeitung. Declaration'. - b K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette'. - c See this volume, pp. 31-32 and 37. - d ibid., pp. 32-38. - e 15 February - f 11 February. Marx probably sent the affidavit without a covering letter, or the letter is no longer extant.





**[p. 48]**

My correspondence with Schily is still going on, of course, since I have to CROSS-EXAMINE him on specific POINTS.

Did Lassalle post you Vogt's booka? In reply to his letter, I told the fool to address the thing to you.b

I expect to have an answer by telegraphic despatch tomorrow from Legal Counsellor Weber.c

There are a number of matters still to be settled tomorrow. If MEANS are available, I may possibly depart some time tomorrow. I can't say for certain, as unforeseen events may detain me a day longer. At any rate, make sure that I find all the letters and PAPERS thrown together in 'one great pile'.

The pitiable Hermann (apparently at the instigation of Kinkel,

WHO IS ABOUT MARRYING AN ENGLISHWOMAN WITH £ 2 - 3 0 0 0 A YEAR) d i d n o t publish the resolution adopted by the Workers' Society.11 Mais ces messieurs y penseront!"

The beastly Telegraph' wrote to me again today and referred me to yesterday's piece by their beastly correspondent^ I'll play the scoundrel a merry tune.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Have not yet heard anything from Papa Blind.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: a C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - b See this volume, p. 27 (Marx's letter to Franz Duncker of 6 February 1860). - c ibid., p. 40. - d ibid., p. 34. - e But these gentlemen will have cause to think it over. - f The Daily Telegraph. - 8 This refers to K. Abel, author of the note published in The Daily Telegraph, No. 1439, 6 February 1860. See this volume, pp. 74-76.

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



