---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "26. Marx to Engels. 15 February "
Page_Range: "86-87"
---

# 26. Marx to Engels. 15 February 



**[p. 26]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 February 1860

Dear Engels,

£5 received. I shall be leaving tomorrow at ABOUT 7.30 a.m. (Euston Street85). From Schaible's statement 3 enclosed herewith (this cutting is from The Daily Telegraph) you will see that the powder I administered has proved effective. FACTS prejudicial to the Genevan advocatus imperiih will now emerge. I at once wrote a brief note to Schaible, the contents of which were as follows:

His statement was important in being anti-Vogt and hence pro-main issue. It did nothing to alter Blind's -WILFULLY FALSE' and in n o way 'ERRONEOUS' STATEMENT in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung.c

Still less his CONSPIRACY, of which he could, I said, convince himself by reference to the COPY I enclosed of Wiehe's AFFIDAVIT* which has yet to play its public role. You will observe that, IN ORDER TO SAVE BLIND FROM THE WORST, the fellows will come out with genuine FACTS against Vogt and actually grovel in the dust at our feet.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jgi3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Ch. Schaible, 'The Vogt Pamphlet. To the Editor of The Daily Telegraph'. In this statement,published in The Daily Telegraph, No. 1447, 15 February 1860, Schaible claimed to be the author of the pamphlet Zur Warnung (see present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 130-31). - b imperial advocate (a reference to Vogt) - c No. 313, 9 November 1859 - d See this volume, p. 37.



