---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "28. Engel s to Ferdinand Lassalle. 20 February "
Page_Range: "88-89"
---

# 28. Engel s to Ferdinand Lassalle. 20 February 



**[p. 28]**

ENGELS TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

Manchester, 20 February 1860 6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road

Dear Lassalle,

Many thanks for sending me Vogt's concoction." More about this below.

As Duncker has doubtless told you, I have offered him a sort of sequel to Po and Rhine" which he accepts subject to the proviso 'considerations of principle'.' Even though I find it somewhat surprising that the publisher and not the author should be responsible for the principles advanced in a work, I have, nevertheless, tried in vain to discover what can be meant by this. Surely D. isn't claiming that his publishing house is simply an extension of the Volks-Zeitung, which, by the way, I never see up here. Finally, it occurred to me that D. may have got wind of the fact that my views on the Italian question are different from yours and made this proviso out of excessive concern for your pamphlet/ I'm convinced that, should this be the case, I would only have to draw your attention to it, for you to reassure D. on this score. In view of your objectivity, you would, I know, consider it an insult, were anyone to suppose you capable of even remotely desiring the suppression of a work because it was opposed to your own views on a question of this kind. In fact, I had to spend a long time thinking things over before I could make up my mind to raise this point with you, being afraid you might be offended with me for assuming such -imputations to be possible, even at third hand. But since there seems no other explanation for D.'s 'considerations', I have no choice.

Settling Vogt's hash will be mere child's play. We dealt with this ancient, warmed-up drivel as much as eight years ago87 (though the little Genevan philistine in his secluded corner doesn't know it) and we'll jolly well demolish it so that nothing's left but the stench,

[^1]: a C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - b F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine. - c See this volume, p. 50. - d [F. Lassalle,] Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preussens, Eine Stimme aus der Demokratie, Berlin, 1859.



