---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "29. Marx to J. M. Weber. 21 February "
Page_Range: "89-91"
---

# 29. Marx to J. M. Weber. 21 February 



**[p. 52]**

Most cordially,

Yours,

Engels

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published in English for the first time

29

MARX TO J. M. WEBER

Manchester, 21 February 1860 6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road

Dear Sir,

The power of attorney was not sent off to you immediately after my first lettere because, further on in that same letter, I had requested you to telegraph me. Having waited a few days, it

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: a K. Blind, 'Gegen Karl Vogt', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 44 (supplement), 13 February 1860. - b [E. Biskamp,] 'Erklärung', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 46 (supplement), 15 February 1860. - < W. Wolff, 'Erklärung', Die Reform, No. 18, 11 February 1860, Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 44 (supplement), 13 February 1860, and Volks-Zeitung, No. 47, 24 February 1860. - d See this volume, p. 49. - e ibid., pp. 40-45.





**[p. 53]**

Since this did not arrive and since, on the other hand, you did not reject by telegraph my request that you should act as my lawyer, I assume that you have accepted my brief. To avoid further loss of time, I am therefore sending you the following in this registered letter:

1. The power of attorney; 2. 7 enclosures, together with translations where the original is in English.

These enclosures comprise:

1. A. Vögele's affidavit78; 2. J. F. Wiehe's affidavita; 3. My English anti-Blind circular.b

4. and 5. Two letters concerning this matter from the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung to me.89

6. Dr Schaible's statement in the London 'Daily Telegraph' of 15th February 1860, page 5, column 5, paragraph headed 'The Vogt Pamphlet'.

7. A letter from K. Blind to Liebknecht dated 8 September 1859.90

Tomorrow, by which time I shall, perhaps, have received a letter from you, I shall take the liberty of sending you some comments on these documents. However, you will see at first glance that the infamous conduct attributed to me in No. 41 of the National- Zeitung, where I am portrayed as the anonymous fabricator of papers allegedly circulating in other people's names, is irrefutably shown in law to be an infamous libel.

As regards the affidavits (statements made in court in lieu of an oath), all I would say is this: i You will note that in affidavit enclosure II, the words UPON OATH- have been deleted by the magistrate. For he explained to us that a statement made before him was the equivalent of a sworn statement, that a false statement was a felony and hence punishable with TRANSPORTATION but that, under English law, an oath could properly be administered only in the presence of the defendant.

The rest I shall leave for tomorrow, pending which I remain, Sir,

Your very obedient Servant,

Dr. K. Marx

[^1]: 11 See this volume, pp. 31-32 and 37.- h K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette'.



