---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "35. Marx to Muzembini. 27 February "
Page_Range: "116-117"
---

# 35. Marx to Muzembini. 27 February 



**[p. 79]**

Dr Becker' and others, and upon other information derived from other sources, the said Cherval was publicly expulsed from the German Workmen Club above named, and, soon after, disappeared from London.'*

Engels sends you his kindest regards; he will, by the by, be coming down to London himself sometime in the spring. I beg you to lose no time.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

In the affidavit mention is made of a 'FRIF.NDLY SOCIETY', this being the sort of thing that doesn't sound at all suspect to an English magistrate; besides, you can interpret FRIKNM.Y SOCIETY in any way you wish.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian F.dition, Vol. XXV,

Published in English lor the tirsi time

35

MARX TO MUZEMBINI

Moscow, 1934

[Draft]

Manchester, 27 February 1860 6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road1' My dear Muzembini,

Mr Faucher, I suppose, will have told you that I am just now busied with two actions for libel, the one being carried on at Berlin against the National-Zeitung, the other at London against the Daily Telegraph, both relating to Vogt, the Bonapartist agent's pamphlet against myself.'

In regard to the latter it is of the highest importance for me to be exactly informed of the relations of General Klapka with the

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: •' Hermann Becker - h Marx wrote under the date: 'Enclosed in the letter to my wife. To Mii/.einbini, under the above date, as follows:' - ' C. Vogt, Mein Process gegen die

[^3]: Mlgeineine Zeitung.



