---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "40. Mar x to Bertalan Szemere. 13 March "
Page_Range: "143-144"
---

# 40. Mar x to Bertalan Szemere. 13 March 



**[p. 40]**

MARX TO BERT ALAN SZEMERE142

IN PARIS

Manchester, 13 March 1860 6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road

My dear Sir,

I have not yet received your book* Otherwise I should have given a compte rendub of it in the New-York Tribune.

I sent you the article against Kossuthc on the express condition of its being returned to me. I attach not the least importance to that article, but I want it for specific purpose.

I have instituted two actions for libel at Berlin and London against newspapers'1 which had the impudence of reprinting extracts from Vogt's libel.e I observed, for 10 years, a strict silence in the face of the most reckless calumnies, but I know that now the moment has arrived of publicly exposing them.

My friend from whose house I am addressing these lines to you may perhaps (he is a merchant) become useful to you. Send him a catalogue (Mr Frederick Engels, care of Messrs Ermen and Engels, Manchester) of your wines. But do not use such fellows as Stoffregen for your agents.

Yours truly

In a few days I shall return to London.

[^1]: Williamsf

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934. First published in the language of the original (English) in Szâzadok, Nos. 4-6, Budapest, 1959

[^4]: a B. Szemere, La Question hongroise (1848-1860), Paris, 1860. See also this volume, p. 6. - b review - c K. Marx, 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon'. See also this volume, p. 12. - d National-Zeitung and The Daily Telegraph - e C. Vogt, Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung, Geneva, 1859. - f A. Williams, an alias used by Marx in some of his letters.



