---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "41. Marx to Lucien Jottrand. 13 March "
Page_Range: "144-145"
---

# 41. Marx to Lucien Jottrand. 13 March 



**[p. 41]**

MARX TO LUCIEN JOTTRAND

IN BRUSSELS

Manchester, 13 March 1860 6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road

My dear Sir,

You will excuse me for having not before acknowledged the receipt of the letter you had the kindness to address me from Bruxelles. I thank you for that letter, although I shall abstain from using it in any way. Should I think it opportune laying before the public any official documents, relating to my past life, the

Bruxelles episode—as far as it refers to my relations with the Belgian radicals—would be best characterised by two letters of yours (d.d. 25 févr. 1848" and 19 mai 1848 b) which I have now found among my papers.

Since you belong to the American school of Republicans (whose opinions I do only accept in regard to some political questions), it may interest you to know that, for about 3 years, I am one of the principal writers in the New-York Tribune, the first Anglo-American paper. I have improved this connexion for giving M. Spilthoorn, on his passage through London, letters of recommendation for the U. St. Should you, on any occasion, want to publish anything— relating to the affairs of your country—in the Tribune, you may rely on my willingness of obliging you.

The shameless attacks (on behalf of which I have instituted two actions for libel, one at Berlin, one at London) recently made against me, proceed all from the Bonapartist camp. Monsieur Louis Bonaparte, through the instrumentality of M. Mocquard, his secrétaire intime, has publicly thanked the New-York Times for having done its best (and this its 'best' was of a very shabby description) to counteract my New-York Tribune strictures (since 1852) of the Lesser Empire.143

I have the honour

To be your humble servant

K. Marx I am here at Manchester for a few days only. My address is: 9, Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, London.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 102. - b Marx quotes the letter in Herr Vogt, present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 320-21.



