---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "42. Engel s to Ferdinand Lassalle. 15 March "
Page_Range: "145-147"
---

# 42. Engel s to Ferdinand Lassalle. 15 March 



**[p. 108]**

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English) and in Russian, in Voprosy istorii KPSS, No. 4, Moscow, 1958

42

ENGELS TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

Manchester, 15 March3 1860

Dear Lassalle,

Very many thanks for the trouble you have been to with Duncker in connection with my pamphlet.b I would have agreed to the arrangement of my being named had not another publisherc

accepted it in the meantime (when this reaches you, the thing will probably be out) and were I not determined that the 'author of Po and Rhine' should first carve out a place for himself in military literature before making his official entry (i.e. on the title page) as a civilian before the lieutenants. When you say that you would be sure to convince us and hence believe it would be in our own interests not to commit ourselves by name to the views we have held so far in regard to the Italian business, your argument is, no doubt, of crucial value subjectively speaking; similarly we can assure you that we are just as sure of our ability to convince you, the more so since our views are based on a careful study of diplomatic material which, at least on certain points, is available in pretty complete form to the public in London, as it surely is not to the public in Berlin (where, indeed, it does not for the most part exist at all).

Marx got your letter the day before yesterday and will be answering it.d In the meantime I enclose the Knight of the Noble Consciousness? previously forgotten.'

[^1]: a A slip of the pen in the original: February. - b F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine. - c G. Behrend - d See this volume, pp. 116-17. - e by Marx - f See this volume, p. 88.





**[p. 109]**

Just now I'm writing trivia about the reorganisation of the army in Prussia and have offered these to Duncker.

F. Engels

Before I forget. Marx has written to red Wolff,145 of whom, however, we haven't heard for years. In the meantime Vogt, accompanied by the homme entretenu and SWINDLER Klapka, has been to dine with Plon-Plon yet again.

I have re-opened this letter, having closed it without putting in the Knight, in order to tell you that we are unable to find the only copy of the thing that's still up here in Manchester. Someone must have pinched it. Marx has still got some in London and is writing to ask that some oi them be sent up here forthwith, whereupon we shall immediately send you one.

You would greatly oblige me if you could send me, by return of mail and unstamped, a few numbers of the Volks-Zeitung and the

[^1]: Tout à vousb

[^2]: :l Polish name: Wroclaw. - b Ever yours - c kept man



