---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "43. Marx to J. M. Weber. 27 March "
Page_Range: "147-149"
---

# 43. Marx to J. M. Weber. 27 March 



**[p. 110]**

First published in: F. Lassalle, Nachgelas- sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

43

MARX TO J. M. WEBER

IN BERLIN

London, 27 March 9 Grafton Terrace, Haverstock Hill

1860 Maitland Park,

Sir,

I am enclosing herewith the last two documents needed to complete what has already been sent. The first is a letter from the editor-in-chief of the New-York Tribune to me.1 I have included a German translation.

The second document is highly important in that it proves that the wretched Cherval, alias Nugent, alias Cramer, far from being in touch with me when he was in Geneva, was hounded out of that city as a result of my book about the Communist trial in Cologne.b

The letter is from Johann Philipp Becker in Paris (Becker fled after the affair of 1830/31, in 1848/49 he first commanded the volunteers in Baden, then he was colonel of the revolutionary army in Baden and the Palatinate; he is now a business man in Paris and, so to speak, the doyen of the German émigrés) and is directed to Rheinländer, a merchant in London, with whom he has business connections. Mr Rheinländer, who is an acquaintance of mine, was good enough to let me have the letter.1

Apart from this letter, I have also sent you:

1. Dated 21 Feb. Power of attorney, together with enclosures.

[^1]: a A letter from Charles Dana. See this Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. edition, Vol. 17, pp. 60-63.

[^2]: volume, p. 68.- b K. Marx, Revelations ' Marx quotes it in Herr Vogt, present





**[p. 111]**

Your most obedient Servant,

Dr Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

44

MARX TO BERTALAN SZEMERE

IN PARIS

London, 4 April 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill My dear Sir,

I have not yet received your pamphlet.b

Mr Engels is my best friend and, consequently, will do everything to prove useful to you.

[As to]c Stoff regen, I do not know him, but was [told in] Manchester by different merchants tha[t he is] a person lacking tact, intrusive etc. Stil[l] in some lower layers of the Lancashire society, he may, possibly, sell your wines as well as anybody else.

You will oblige me by sending me by next post the address of General Perczel. I want an explication on his part.d Which are your relations with P.?

Les choses marchent!'

Yours truly

[^1]: A. Williams First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Revue d'histoire com- parée, t. IV, No. 1-2, Budapest, 1946

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 53, 59-76, 92-104. - b B. Szemere, La Question hongroise

[^3]: (1848-1860), Paris, 1860. - c Manuscript damaged. - d See this volume, pp. 125-26. - e Things are going well.



