---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "44. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 4 April Ill 45. Engels to Marx. 8 April "
Page_Range: "149-150"
---

# 44. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 4 April Ill 45. Engels to Marx. 8 April 



**[p. 45]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 8 April 1860

Dear Moor,

During the last few days of my stay in Barmen ,46 the contract relating to the Manchester business has been subjected to thorough legal scrutiny. This convinced me that everything over here was hanging in the balance and that I must get back without a moment's delay. I left on Friday morning at 6 o'clock and was back here by 12 noon yesterday, i.e. in 30 hours. *The thing was, we wanted to secure Charley.*'1 This was accomplished yesterday evening, in so far as it was necessary, and now I shall have to wait and see what Gottfriedb does. However, my base of operations is now secure.

Under the circumstances, I shan't be able to come to London until everything here has been settled. Until then I shall be up to my eyes in business matters and legal quibbles, and there's nothing I can do about it. In the meantime I have learned from Gumpert and Siebel what they know. I've neither seen nor heard anything of my pamphlet.c You might return me the copy you have, also the letter (presumably from Fischel?) G. sent you,'1 so that I know what is going on. Open the letter if you haven't already done so; this will save writing to and fro.

G. told me that there had been some further unpleasantness at my lodgings; I'm moving out straight away.

I neither saw nor heard anything of the Prussian police. No one demanded my passport or anything of that kind. The few policemen I ran into in Barmen gave me a MILITARY SALUTE, that was all.

Industry on the Rhine has developed enormously and the constitutional system has bitten deep into the citizenry. Things have changed vastly since 1848, though sufficient of the old leaven still remains.

[^1]: Still no reply from Webere? If it doesn't arrive soon, there'll be nothing else for it but to get Ephraim Artfulf to take him to task.

[^2]: a Roesgen - b Ermen - c F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine. - d See this volume, pp. 113-14, 133. - e ibid., p. 92. - f Lassalle



