---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "46. Marx to Engels. 9 April "
Page_Range: "150-151"
---

# 46. Marx to Engels. 9 April 



**[p. 113]**

Your

F. E.

Will you also send the key to the lower bookcase. What is all this about the parcel of letters that was supposedly left in the bedroom, or so Gumpert maintains?

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, j Qia Published in English for the first time

46

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 April 1860

Dear Engels,

Great disappointment today when, instead of yourself, your letter arrived. However, we saw that it only made 'good sense'.

Siebel has carried out his mission well and with great discretion.147

I still haven't been able to find the key.3 However, the 'upper' key also fits the lower key-hole. It locks both compartments.

I shall send you Weydemeyer's letter shortly. Before leaving Manchester I confided to Gumpert, etc., such fables as I thought necessary to justify my non-trip to Holland.

Freiligrath has written me a friendly letter. Up till now I have neither answered him, nor seen him.

The only letter I have had from Gumpert that was addressed to you was intended for me—from Liebknecht, who informs me that the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung has given him notice.148

No news from Fischel. Nor yet from Weber. I shall post you your pamphletb from here on Thursday^ Borkheim has advertised it in the Hermann (latest issue)d and I in

[^1]: " See previous letter. - b F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine. - c 11 April - d Hermann, 7 April 1860.



