---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "51. Marx to Engels. 12 April "
Page_Range: "158-159"
---

# 51. Marx to Engels. 12 April 



**[p. 121]**

After this affair, we can be more certain of Charles'* than ever; he actually believes that we two will be able to make Gottfried b do anything, perhaps even retire into private life.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 30, Moscow 1963 Published in English for the first

time

51

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 12 April 1860

Dear Engels,

BEST THANKS for the hundred pound note. It came as a glorious surprise THIS MORNING. The whole family was filled with glee.

You may or may not have seen that the Kölnische Zeitung (Schlesinger, London) has had the impudence to talk about the Brimstone Gang65 and its Russian redolence. WELL! Through the good offices of my bankrupt friend Speck I am now hot on the trail of the whole Brimstone Gang here in London.

D'abord,c you'll have seen in the papers that Palmerston has amused himself by presenting Mr Reuter (the Jew from Trieste of telegraph fame)d to the Queen.e And who do you think is factotum to this grammatically illiterate Jew Reuter? — Siegmund Engländer, who was expelled from Paris because, although a spy in

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Roesgen - b Ermen - c First - •' Julius Reuter. A list of persons presented to Queen Victoria on 28 March 1860, was published in The Times, No. 23580, 29 March 1860. - e Victoria



