---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "53. Marx to Engels. 16 April "
Page_Range: "160-162"
---

# 53. Marx to Engels. 16 April 



**[p. 123]**

I remain, Sir, Your most Obedient Servant,

Dr Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

53

MARX TO ENGELS67

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 16 April 1860

Dear Engels,

Have had some most valuable material from Lommel today." However, he volunteered to submit to a further CROSS-EXAMINATION, and one such has already gone off to him today.42 It was also much needed. Moreover, in the letter in which I buttered him up, I suggested he should send 300 copies of his Hinter den Coulissen to Petsch (the booksellers) here. I would promote the sales (in working men's clubs, etc.). Now he wants an advance of 150 francs. I think that you in Manchester should CI.UB together forthwith and raise a few pounds, while I would find the rest down here. The man is invaluable to us. He has also written about this to Siebel. Hence I shall also drop the latter a couple of lines today. Siebel should do nothing without first consulting me.

I enclose Weydemeyer's letter.

Not a word yet from that confounded lawyer,1' to whom I sent a reminder last Friday.1 However, he's got the retaining fee, and I his acceptance of the brief. So, I cannot imagine that he will lay himself open to a lawsuit against himself.

A lot more sanctimonious preaching from Lassalle, together

[^1]: •' See this volume, pp. 118-19. - b J. M. Weber - c See previous letter.

[^2]: 6—558





**[p. 124]**

Mont Sion does in fact exist, or so I see from the map included in the BLUE BOOK on Savoyf (in the Genevois, EX-NEUTRAL).

Apropos. Questions for Lupus:

1. In one of his letters from Zurich I find that he was acquainted with Brass. Could he supply any information about him?

2. Did the rump parliament in Stuttgart I54 pass a resolution whereby the former imperial regents have the right to recall the German parliament on any particular occasion?

Do you or Lupus know anything about a request for annexation sent in 1849 by the then provisional government of the Palatinate to the French National Assembly?

When are you coming down here?

Your

Moor

Haven't seen Freiligrath yet. The idea of meeting the chap is 'awful',g and yet I've got to swallow the bitter pill. If only for diplomatic reasons, after our mutual assurances of friendship.

And then, he has written to me in an AMIABLE manner.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a Lassalle, Fichte's politisches Vermächtniss und die neueste Gegenwart. - b Demokratische Studien - c Savoy, Nice and the Rhine - d Das System der erworbenen Rechte - e Sophie von Hatzfeldt - f Papers relating to proposed Annexation of Savoy and Nice to France and memorial on the relations between Switzerland and Savoy as a Neutral, London, 1860. - s Marx uses the dialectal form 'öklig' for 'eklig'.



