---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "54. Marx to M6r Perczel. 16 April "
Page_Range: "162-163"
---

# 54. Marx to M6r Perczel. 16 April 



**[p. 54]**

MARX TO MÖR PERCZEL

IN ST HÉLIÉR

London, 16 April 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear General,

In furtherance of a work I intend to publish on Bonapartist machinations," I am taking the liberty of addressing myself to you as one of the most vigorous champions of European liberty. During the recent war in Italy 4(i you issued a statement in which you showed that you had seen through the humbug and had therefore made a timely exit from the stage—proof, if proof were needed, of your superiority to that clown, Kossuth, and his sycophants. Having unfortunately lost that statement, I had recourse to Szemere in Paris.b He referred me to you. Hence, if yoq would be so kind as to let me have a copy of the said statement, together with your comments on the deception practised on the Hungarians in Italy, you would be doing a service to the good cause.

As early as last summer (1859), in articles of mine which appeared in the New-York Tribune' and the London 'Free Press',d I mentioned your name as that of the only military representative of the Hungarian emigration not to have succumbed to the bribes and wiles of the diplomats of France and Russia, or allowed himself to be impressed by Kossuth's phantasmagoria, and, in the new book I propose to write, I should be glad to allot you the place of honour that befits you.

I am taking the liberty of reminding you that, as early as 1848-49, when Editor-in-Chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, I was the most determined advocate of revolutionary Hungary in Germany. Now, as then, I consider Hungary's independence and sovereignty to be the conditio sine qua of Germany's release from slavery. But with no less determination do I reject the endeavour to

[^1]: •' Herr Vogt - b See this volume, p. 111. - c 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon' - '' 'Particulars of Kossuth's Transaction with Louis Napoleon'

[^2]: 6*



