---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "55. Marx to Engels. 17 April "
Page_Range: "163-164"
---

# 55. Marx to Engels. 17 April 



**[p. 126]**

Yours,

Dr Karl Marx

First published in Hungarian in Parttör- Printed according to the original téneti Kozlemények, No. 4, Budapest, 1966 . and in the language of the original ^" b„' l s h e d '" E n g ' ' ° r t h e " (German) in: Marx, Engels, Werke, Bd. 39, Berlin, 1973

time

55

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 April 1860

Dear Engels,

I trust that your indisposition isn't serious. Also that you are taking care of yourself and not over-working.

I have sent Lommel the 150 francs today." (What you don't manage to scrape together in Manchester will be collected here.) For the following reasons:

1. If he is to retrieve the booksb from the bookbinders', he has. got to pay 50 frs. That leaves him 100 frs. To haggle over that would be exceedingly impolitic and would not command any respect for our party.

2. The main thing is that the so-called advance be sent to the chap quickly and unconditionally. In that way, he'll be beholden to us. The other half he shall have BY AND BY and thus will remain

4. From Petsch's note enclosed herewith (I gave him the copy Siebel brought back with him) you will see that he believes that he can make a profit on what is, in fact, an interesting pamphlet.

5. L. is a decent chap. Otherwise he'd sell himself. From the papers Becker has sent me, I see that Lommel was a leading light

[^1]: ENGAGED t O U S . 3. As soon as he has the money, he will leave for Savoy whence he will send back reports.

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 123. - b [G. Lommel,] Hinter den Coulissen.



