---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "56. Engels to Gottfried Ermen. 19 April "
Page_Range: "164-165"
---

# 56. Engels to Gottfried Ermen. 19 April 



**[p. 127]**

in the old Republican Party. Also a friend of Heinzen's. What a clamour there'll be from the latter over this defection!

I am in two minds about Siebel's work for the Strassburger Zeitung?

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

56

ENGELS T O GOTTFRIED ERMEN

IN MANCHESTER

Copy Manchester, 19 April 1860

Sir,

I have no hesitation in expressing my regret that you should have taken offence at my taking home the book of calculations during dinner-time. As books have been taken home, before, by others connected with the office, I did not expect it would have caused you any annoyance. As to any intentions on my part of taking any undue advantage, you are aware that the whole of the calculations contained in the said book are so much out of date that not one of the elements given therein agrees with the present real cost. I could not, therefore, have any such intention, and [I] hope the feeling now expressed by you is not in any way influenced by the prospect of the arrangements for winding up, or otherwise settling, the affairs of the firm, it being the interest of all parties that such matters should be conducted in a friendly and accommodating spirit.

I am, Sir,

your obedient servant,

[^1]: Fred. Engels Written in English. First published in: Reproduced from the original Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 30, Moscow, 1963 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Presumably the Strassburger Korrespondent für West- und Mitteleuropa.



