---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "57. Marx to J. M. Weber. 21 April "
Page_Range: "165-166"
---

# 57. Marx to J. M. Weber. 21 April 



**[p. 57]**

MARX TO J. M. WEBER

IN BERLIN

London, 21 April 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Sir,

Eleven days ago I sent you a letter," in which I notified you that I had still not received either an acknowledgment of, or a reply to, the numerous letters (enclosing documents, power of attorney, etc.) despatched from here and Manchester over the past two months, although your letter of 22 February had led me to expect an early communication and, according to that same letter, the action will become statute-barred on 22 April (i.e. tomorrow). I therefore requested an explanation.

Having received no reply to that letter either, I am forced to conclude

Either that my letters failed to arrive, although every one, save the last, was registered;

Or that at least one of your letters has been intercepted. Therefore, should this letter suffer the same fate as its predecessors, I shall lodge a complaint both with the General Post Office over here and with the Prussian Embassy; I shall also, if need be, make a public protest in the columns of the London 'Times'.

I am, Sir, Your most Obedient Servant,

Dr K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Obviously the letter of 13 April 1860, see this volume, pp. 122-23.



