---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "60. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 24 April "
Page_Range: "168-169"
---

# 60. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 24 April 



**[p. 60]**

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

London, 24 April 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, H aver stock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

Many thanks for Humboldta and Fichte.'59 I hadn't yet read the latter, and it was CLEVER of you to throw it into the fray. When your letter arrived, I got Engels to send me both your letter and the one from Counsellor Weber in Berlin. From this last I see that the matter of not mentioning his name applied solely to my public announcements in the newspapers'3; hence I was, in this instance, labouring under a misapprehension.

Today I have heard from Weber. From his letter it would appear that he began by filing a criminal action>He then received the following communication dated 18th inst.

Weber has appealed to the Chief Public Prosecutor1 against this ruling. At the same time, in order to prevent its becoming statute-barred and to keep open another course of action, he has filed the action for injuria with the civil judge.

With my pamphletd in view, I am, of course, having investiga- tions made in Paris and Switzerland, and have even sent an emissaryc to Geneva. I now have proof that Vogt is a French agent. At the moment, he no longer feels safe in Geneva and is therefore sounding out the possibility of becoming a citizen of another canton.

Apropos. An acquaintance of mine'—a Berliner—staunchly maintains that a certain Mayer or Meier,70 of the firm Abraham M. and Co. (or Sons), who lives in Viktoriastrasse, Berlin, is the

[^1]: 'The original documents are returned to Dr Carl Marx, c/o Counsellor Weber, together with the notification that no issue of public importance is raised by this matter which could make it desirable for me to take any action (Art. XVI of the Prolegomena to the Penal Code of April 14, 1851). Berlin, April 18, etc. Lippe.'

[^2]: a Briefe von Alexander von Humboldt an Varnhagen von Ense aus den Jahren 1827 bis 1858, Leipzig, 1860. - b See this volume, p. 116. - l Schwarck - d Herr Vogt - e Carl Siebel - f Julius Faucher



