---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "61. Marx to J. M. Weber. 24 April "
Page_Range: "169-170"
---

# 61. Marx to J. M. Weber. 24 April 



**[p. 132]**

correspondent of the Daily Telegraph. Could you not get your lady friends to investigate?

Shall reply to your letter anon. No doubt you'll have left Berlin by the time this note reaches you.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Printed according to the original Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart- Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

61

MARX TO J. M. WEBER

IN BERLIN

London, 24 April 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Sir,

I have the honour to enclose a retaining fee of 15 talers, at the same time advising you that I fully agree to all the measures adopted by you.

I remain, Sir,

Your Obedient Servant,

Dr Karl Marx

P. S. As a result of investigations that I have started in Paris and Switzerland, notably in Geneva,"10 I now have proof (after the proceedings I intend to publish it in pamphlet form) that Professor Karl Vogt is no more than a common French agent. I believe, by the by, that the annexation of Nice and Savoy will have opened the eyes of even the blindest of men to the 'Italian work of liberation',161 the danger that is threatening Germany and the Tightness of those who uttered timely warnings.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time



