---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "64. Marx to Engels. 8 May "
Page_Range: "172-173"
---

# 64. Marx to Engels. 8 May 



**[p. 135]**

up. For the next few weeks, by the way, I shall probably have to drudge fittingly, for Monsieur Gottfried intends to make great changes and do a lot of reorganising the moment he's in sole charge of the CONCERN.

Many regards to your wife and the young ladies.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and ! : " b h s h e d ' " E n g ' 1 S h ° r t h e " Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

time

64

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 May 1860 Dear Frederick,

Reiff is a scoundrel. No one sent him up to Manchester. He disappeared from here after he had been exposed. He was thrown out of the League63 back in 1850. During the preliminary investigation at the Cologne trial2 he actually turned traitor. I've just found a letter of Bermbach's which refers to this.3 So, have nothing to do with him.

As to your pamphlet,1' you'll have found something in Fischel's letter. By the by, in your place I shouldn't hesitate to exploit friend Siebel's minor literary connections (as soon as he's up and about again, that is) for the purpose of combating the conspiration

du silence. Had you actually put your name to the pamphlet, the public would have seized upon it, if only out of curiosity. Behrend, by the by, seems to be even worse than Duncker.

Szemere is a man who likes to ask others to do him a service, but who keeps his own pocket-flaps buttoned. You have now done enough for him and, if I were you, I would leave his wine to its mission toute patriotique?

[^1]: •' Marx quoted Bermbach's letter in his letter to Engels of 20 July 1852. See present edition, Vol. 39, pp. 134-35. - b Savoy, Nice and the Rhine - < wholly patriotic mission



