---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "65. Marx to Eduard Fischel. 8 May "
Page_Range: "173-174"
---

# 65. Marx to Eduard Fischel. 8 May 



**[p. 136]**

I don't much care for the SETTLEMENT with G. Ermen. T h e question is, whether your family is or is not leaving any capital in the business. If the former, it might provide a vantage point from which to negotiate.

From your letter it would appear that you are once again going to cancel or postpone your trip down here. Considering how rapid communications are, you ought really to be able to spare a couple of days.

What d o you think of the Sicilian business? 165

Things in Vienna are said to be very revolutionary. T h e English are, of course, now plaguing us with talk about Brück. T h e day before yesterday a chap was again badgering me about it. H e asked: 'Now. WHAT DO YOU SAY OF BRUCK'S SUICIDE?' 'I'LL TELL YOU, SIR. IN AUSTRIA THE ROGUES CUT THEIR OWN THROATS, WHILE IN ENGLAND THEY

CUT THEIR PEOPLE'S PURSES.'

Borkheim has just written to me from Dublin. H e will be arriving in Manchester on Saturday a evening and will come and see you on Sunday.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

65

[London,] 8 May 1860

Dear Sir,

Many thanks for your letter and for your trouble. I shall shortly be sending you a letter from little Faucher on the subject of Mayer.b

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: MARX T O EDUARD FISCHEL 1 4 2

[^3]: IN BERLIN

[^4]: •' 11 May - b See this volume, pp. 131-32.

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time



