---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "67. Engels to Marx. 11 May "
Page_Range: "175-176"
---

# 67. Engels to Marx. 11 May 



**[p. 138]**

About the other points, tomorrow. Siebel wants to know whether, amongst the papers he brought back, you have found the pamphlet, Die Sphinx auf dem französischen Kaiserthron*; Schily has noticed that it's missing and is afraid he may have lost it.

Saw Lupus yesterday. The bone's still troubling him, and rheumatism into the bargain. It almost looks as though Gumpert's intervention is bringing the matter to a head, which is just as well, since it will be over all the sooner, and then L. will be back on his pins again.

Regards to the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engeis, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

67

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 11 May 1860

Dear Moor,

My mother in grave danger. Two telegrams from Barmen. No one's allowed to see her. I'm to go over there again, the necessary steps are being taken. How it will turn out I cannot say. This business has put my mind into a turmoil; apparently it really is typhoid.

I can't write to you about anything else today, my mind being altogether too full, and besides it's too late. For seven weeks now

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a [K. Grün,] Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, die Sphinx auf dem französischen Kaiserthron, Hamburg, 1860.



