---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "68. Marx to Carl Siebel. 15 May "
Page_Range: "176-178"
---

# 68. Marx to Carl Siebel. 15 May 



**[p. 139]**

I've been living in a state of continual tension and excitation which has now reached a climax—never has it been so bad. Fortunately, I am ALL RIGHT again physically. If I have to go to Barmen, I can probably so arrange things as to spend another day in London en route, in which case I shall see you.lb6

Many regards.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. F^ngels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jqi Q Published in English for the first time

68

MARX TO CARL SIEBEL

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 May [1860]

Dear Siebel,

Herewith the answer from Berlin from which it appears that the criminal action has been dismissed. The civil action will never make any headway.3 Kindly send the Mittelrheinische Zeitung a few lines setting forth the facts of the case. Let me have the letter back as soon as you've shown it to Gumpert and Lupus.

I have not yet approached a publisher about the pamphletb and am wondering whether to try Leipzig or Hamburg.

I have not received the Sphinx6 from you but it doesn't matter. I do not regard Boustrapa167 as a sphinx, still less Mr Karl Grün as an Oedipus.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Engels left here yesterday evening,166 sain et sauf.c

[^2]: •' See this volume, p. 129. - b K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - c safe and sound - d [K. Grün,] Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, die Sphinx auf dem französischen Kaiserthron, Hamburg, 1860.





**[p. 140]**

Apropos.

If you were to send the Mittelrheinische Zeitung a note about the progress of my case, dated 'Berlin', you might take the opportuni- ty of slipping in a word or two about the Eichhoff-Stieber case,44

which was decided on 10 May in the Court of the First Instance in Berlin. For Eichhoff has been given an eighteen-month sentence for 'libelling' Stieber. The libel suit rested mainly on the denunciation of Stieber (in the London Hermann) for perjury, theft, etc., perpetrated by him in the course of the Communist trial in Cologne (1852).2 Below I cite various instances that are characteristic of the proceedings in the Prussian law court.

1. Eichhoff 's denunciation rested (except for my pamphlet,3

which he could not, of course, mention) on the reports printed by the 'Kölnische Zeitung' during the proceedings in Cologne,1' the authenticity of which has never been challenged either by Stieber or by anyone else. The court declared these reports to be inadmissible evidence. Whenever it was in the interests of Stieber, the court allowed as authentic the reports in the Vossische Zeitungc

(probably deriving from Stieber himself), because they had been declared 'authentic' by Signor Stieber. Whenever it went against the interests of Stieber's denunciator, the selfsame court declared the meagre record kept by the clerk of the court to be the only authentic source.

2. Goldheim, a police official, and Greif, a police lieutenant, Stieber's chief fellow-culprits and his subordinate tools in the Communist trial of 1852, were wholly exempted from CROSS- EXAMINATION because the court did not wish to expose these gentlemen to the alternative (as the presiding judge'1 frankly stated) 'of either committing perjury or testifying against them- selves'. On the other hand, their statements were allowed as evidence for Stieber's defence.

3. In 1851, Stieber and Greif had got the Prussian police spy Reuter to break into Oswald Dietz's house and steal papers, which (although they were in fact quite irrelevant to the charge 1<>8) were produced in evidence by Stieber during the Cologne trial. This

[^1]: a Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne - b Reports on the Communist trial in Cologne were published in the Kölnische Zeitung from 5 October to 13 November 1852, under the title 'Assisen-Procedur gegen D. Herrn. Becker und Genossen. Anklage wegen hochverrätherischen Complottes'. - ' Reports on the Cologne Communist trial were published in the Königlich privilegirte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen (Vossische Zeitung) from 6 October to 16 November 1852, under the title 'Die Verhandlungen des grossen Kommunistenprozess vor dem Assisenhofe zu Köln. - d Göbel



