---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "69. Marx to Engels. 28 May "
Page_Range: "178-179"
---

# 69. Marx to Engels. 28 May 



**[p. 141]**

theft was one of the counts upon which Eichhoff's denunciation of Stieber rested. And now just listen to this! Drenkmann, the Royal Procurator, enunciated the following brand-new theory of theft:

'The question as to whether or not the papers were acquired by theft may,' he said, 'be left in abeyance; in forming an opinion of the accused, it is of no account. Had they in fact been acquired by theft, the police official who had thus obtained them could not be accused of theft in the legal sense, but at most of immoral conduct. A theft in the legal sense demands a dolus malus? This, however, cannot be assumed of police officials who might have instigated such a theft, since they would have been acting, not for their private advantage, but in the interests of the State.'

Thus, if a Prussian police official breaks into a house in London and 'steals' from it, he is 'at most' committing an immoral action, but not a crime in law. This is a suspension of COMMON LAW imposed upon the English by the Prussian State.

4. Hirsch, in prison in Hamburg, had testified on oath that the minute-book 169 had been fabricated by himself and Fleury under Greifs supervision. Why wasn't Hirsch taken to Berlin to be cross-examined as a witness there during the trial?

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

69

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 28 May 1860 Dear Engels,

The enclosed is from Lassalle.b Let me know by return what you think I should write and tell him re Fischel.

I do not fall in with his suggestion about Berlin. Nothing yet from Lommel.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: a evil intent - b Lassalle's letter to Marx of 24 May 1860 suggesting that Marx should testify at Eichhoff's trial in Berlin. For Marx's reply see this volume, pp. 145-55.



