---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "71. Marx to Eduard Fischel. 1 June "
Page_Range: "180-182"
---

# 71. Marx to Eduard Fischel. 1 June 



**[p. 143]**

him in practice, and rile him the more for the knowledge that it was Fischel who saw to my pamphlet.3

You might also observe for his benefit how revolutionary a mode of action it is, first to deprive the Germans, or get others to deprive them, of their best territory and the very basis of their national existence on the pretext that the present rulers of that territory are reactionaries, and then to expect revolution. And it mightn't be a bad idea to say something about superstitious belief in the revolutionary initiative of the crapauds!' The whole to be presented in the usual allusive manner so that he'll have to chew it over for the space of four weeks and then wipe the slate clean by writing you a four-page letter to which you won't reply.

My coming up here on Saturday' was most useful. By Sunday I had already found out a great deal that is important to negotiations, and now have the draft contract to study.

Best regards to your wife and children. Siebel wants to leave.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, , , • , , . ,. r. Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and ^ h e d '" E " g l l S h f OT t h e f , W t

71

[London,] 1 June 1860

Sir,

For the past three weeks I have been suffering from a liver complaint, which has made it quite impossible for me to write or work and from which I have not yet wholly recovered. As a result, I have got into such arrears with my work that the next few weeks are spoken for, and hence I shall under no circumstances be able to

[^1]: Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: time

[^3]: MARX TO EDUARD FISCHEL142

[^4]: IN BERLIN

[^5]: Savoy, Nice and the Rhine - b toads. Engels means the French philistines. - c 26 May





**[p. 144]**

start contributing immediately to the new newspaper." Could you send me one or two numbers of the same for my perusal? And likewise give me some advice about the PRINCIPAL MANAGERS of the new undertaking? Black, red and gold is a couleur which can now be used to some effect vis-à-vis other countries.170

I recommend to you Mr Georg Lommel, 85 rue du Nord, Café Court, Genève, for the post of Geneva correspondent of the paper.

Geneva is now a major seat of Bonapartist intrigue, and Lommel is well informed. I am convinced that he would agree to act as your correspondent on very reasonable terms.

Ad vocemb Abel: Many thanks for this discovery.17' Who is Abel? You would greatly oblige me by sending a few more details; indeed I should like to have this information as soon as possible.

I have doubtless already told you that the Chief Public Prosecutor' has upheld the Public Prosecutor's"1 dismissal of my libel action on the grounds that no 'public interest' would be served thereby.e So the civil action will now be going ahead.

You will have seen in the papers that Reuter, the Jewish confidence trickster who owns the London telegraphic bureau, was presented to the Queen.1 Quite simply the facts are as follows: Reuter's factotum—he himself being barely able to write gram- matically—is the Viennese refugee Sigmund Engländer. This Engländer was previously in Paris, where he contributed to a lithographic news bulletin run under the auspices of the then minister of police8; at the same time, he was a French moucharda When the Oriental war' broke out, he was expelled from Paris because it had been discovered that he was a Russian spy. He then came to London where he eventually entered the service of Reuter, with whom he had already had connections earlier on. Now, since the entire European press is controlled by Reuter via his telegraphic bureau, and the telegraphic bureau by the Russian embassy via Engländer, you will understand why Pam presented Reuter to the Queen. So far as I know, the presentation had something to do with Russia's entry into the Austro-Prussian Telegraphic Union. I have informed Collet of the FACTS. Perhaps you for your own part may be able to make use of them.

I am, Sir,

[^1]: Your obedient servant, K. Marx a See this volume, p. 137 - b Re - c Schwarck - d Lippe - c See this volume, pp. 129, 131. - f Victoria. See this volume, p. 121.- s Maupas - h polite spy - ' the Crimean war (1853-56)



