---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "73. Marx to Engels. 2 June "
Page_Range: "192-193"
---

# 73. Marx to Engels. 2 June 



**[p. 155]**

way, is to him the be-all and end-all. It is true that, in order to achieve it, he dresses up the 'individual' in all manner of ancient garb.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published in English for the first time

73

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 June 1860

Dear Engels,

I have written Izzy ABOUT ten pages, eight of them on the Cologne trial and two on Fischel.3 It was difficult enough for me, because I'm still not fit and am dosing myself constantly.

It's really sickening. Lommel advised me of the despatch of the parcel by rail [a few]b days ago.179 It ought to have been here long since.

Fischel has written to tell me that the Daily Telegraph's correspondent in Berlin is a certain Abel.

Have had a letter from Schily. From it I see that Siebel has notified him of the arrival of your pamphletsc in Manchester. I shall have to send off Schily's copy via Rheinländer. I must also have one copy to use for my own pamphlet.d

Could you let me have something short on the Garibaldi affair for the Tribune by Wednesday" ? If that's not possible, by Friday.1

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: a See previous letter. - b manuscript damaged - c Savoy, Nice and the Rhine - d Herr Vogt - e 6 June - f On about 7 June, Engels wrote the article 'Garibaldi in Sicily'.

[^2]: 7—558



