---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "78. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 23 June "
Page_Range: "200-201"
---

# 78. Marx to Johann Philipp Becker. 23 June 



**[p. 163]**

I like this much better than Uhland's overpolished translation. But another one about 'Sir Jon'a is even nicer.

Your

F. E.

First published, with the verses omitted, Printed according to the original in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published m English m full for the full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

first time

78

MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN PARIS

[London,] 23 June1' 1860

Dear Becker,

Would you be so kind as to forward the enclosed letter to Lommel?4'2 I am sending it through you because I only have an address for Lommel in Geneva which no longer appears to be certain. At any rate, in his last few letters L. has neither mentioned the letters I sent him, nor answered my inquiry regarding the failure to arrive (should have come weeks ago) of a parcel he had advised me of.

It was not until a day or two ago that I became capable of work again and I am still to a certain extent convalescent.

The publishers of the Deutsche Zeitung, which is to come out in Berlin at the beginning of July, have approached me through a third person'1 about contributions. I have not yet given them a

[^1]: Give Schily my kindest regards. I would ask you to arrange the letter Ranickel wrote him to be sent me as soon as possible.l

[^2]: He's ridden hence, for the forest bound, To exercise his horse and hound.

[^3]: The bride uplifted the scarlet red. There lay Herr Oluf, and he w;is dead.

[^4]: (Translated by Alex Milter)

[^5]: a See- this volume, p. 375. - b In the manuscript, mistakenly: January. - c Marx quotes an extract from Ranickel's letter to Schily in Herr Vogt, present edition, Vol. 17, P ""> - d F.duard Fischel



