---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "79. Engels to Marx. About 25 June "
Page_Range: "201-202"
---

# 79. Engels to Marx. About 25 June 



**[p. 164]**

definite answer. I am first asking for further particulars concern- ing the new organ's staff and politics. However, from the advertisements that have so far appeared in the papers it seems to me to be 'pro-National Association'24 and, or so a friend in Berlin" writes, it might be feasible to exert a strong external influence on its stand. Write and let me know if you and Schily would act as joint correspondents for the paper, which evidently has fonds, should you get an invitation to this effect either direct from Berlin or via London! I should like to have an answer about the matter by return, because I would not, of course, drop any hints to this effect in Berlin unless I was certain of your accepting in Paris.

One merit of About's pamphletb is that the current Gotha catch-phrases 187 are here officially adopted for Bonapartist use.

I haven't seen Sasonow over here. Salut.

Your

K. M.

I would ask you to send "on the letter to Lommel as soon as possible.

79

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester, about 25 June 1860]

Dear Moor,

Did you see in the Kölnische Zeitung's 'Miscellaneous News' of Thursday or Fridayc that Izzy has once again contrived to be thrown out of the Viktoria Theatre?

To get himself talked about, I can see the chap keeping someone to give him an annual box on the ears, come the time

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Probably Fischel. - b Ed. About, La Prusse en I860. - c 21 and 22 June



