---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "85. Engels to Marx. After 28 June "
Page_Range: "207-208"
---

# 85. Engels to Marx. After 28 June 



**[p. 85]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, after 28 June 1860] Dear Moor,

Encl. an article on the RIFLE parade3; the subject occurred to me just when I was about to despair. Go over it thoroughly; I haven't the time to do so myself.

Those Prussians really do have a 'nice style' just now. Since the action against the National-Zeitung could only serve to introduce a strident note of discord into the general constitutional harmony, the case must be stopped at all costs. The judges, 'and there still are such in Berlin',192 are being got at and I'm quite positive that Mr Weber has been got at, too. It's quite plain to me from the whole tone of his letters. All the more need, then, to press on with the pamphletb so that the noble Prussians can be shown that they are not, after all, able to suppress such things. Those swine. Might it be, perhaps, that they quietly affected such a liberal attitude towards me,' in order to behave all the more abominably to yourself?

If possible, I shall do Bohemia this evening.0 Incidentally, you should devise the pamphlet—difficult though this may be—in such a way as to make it absolutely impossible for the Prussians to ban it. And above all be quick, for it is probable that between now and 1861 the daydream of peace will gain ascendency and hence interest in high treason wane. Do try and be a bit superficial for once, so that you get it done in time.

Your

F. E. Lommel's parcel there yet? 179

Lupus leaves next week for a month's holiday in Ireland, etc., etc.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works Firsl Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a F. Engels, 'The British Volunteer Force'. - b K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - c See this volume, p. 112. - d ibid., p. 165.



