---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "86. Marx to Engels. 9 July , "
Page_Range: "208-209"
---

# 86. Marx to Engels. 9 July , 



**[p. 86]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 July [1860]

Dear Frederick,

As regards Meissner, the thing strikes me as somewhat dubious, since he is pretty well hand in glove with Vogt and Co. At any rate, I shan't send him a manuscript3 unless he concludes a contract beforehand.

What about Bohemia? I must have it now, otherwise I shall be held up. Anyway, it need only be brief, you know.b

I should also like you to devote a few sentences to a discussion of the military inanities contained in the following utterances of Falstaff Vogt's.c

1. This man, who has made such a detailed study of the relationship between 'Energy and Matter',193 maintains that, within their present boundaries, the United Danubian Principalities are capable—qua independent kingdom—of forming a 'bulwark' against Russia and, indeed, of withstanding the Russians, Aus- trians and Turks.

2. As the main proof of Badinguet'slb3 altruism and policy of non-conquest he puts forward the argument that, after the 'glorious' Crimean campaign/ he did not annex either 'Russian' or 'Turkish' territory.

I am still not yet quite fit. One day, I feel a bit better, the next day a bit worse.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. I have seen (thanks to a young ENGLISHMAN by the name of Green) a letter from Garibaldi in which he heartily reviles Bonaparte and hopes eventually to draw his sword against him.194

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- schen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Marx means his Herr Vogt. - b See this volume, pp. 165, 168, 170. - ' in Vogt's

[^5]: Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas - d the Crimean war (1853-56)



