---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "87. Marx to Engels. 17 July "
Page_Range: "209-210"
---

# 87. Marx to Engels. 17 July 



**[p. 87]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 July [1860]

Dear Engels,

After sundry adventures, which I shall relate some other time, the parcel from Lommel" will certainly arrive today or tomorrow, via Cologne. I already have the consignment note (railway) from Geneva.

A couple of days ago I had a letter from Eccarius in which he told me that his tailoring had come to an end, i.e. the state of his health did not permit him to carry on with it. The doctor had said that he couldn't help him. What he needed was a change of air, etc. Accordingly, I have rented a lodging for him in this neighbourhood at my own expense (away from his FAMILY, OF COURSE, who are staying at their old place); he takes his meals with us ditto and has nothing to do save potter about the Heath b and send one article a week to Weydemeyer, who pays him 3 dollars per article. I hope he will pull through. I have likewise bought him some port. But I can't carry on like this, since at the present moment, when our cash box is at a low ebb, the other additional expenses he involves us in are already a burden.

Couldn't you do something quickly on Garibaldi, or on the Prussian government, which has pushed through its army reform behind the backs of the Chambers,195 or something else of the kind?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: It's nice that Garibaldi has had Farina hounded out.196

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- schen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2. Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 155, 158. - b Hampstead Heath



