---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Marx. About 23 July "
Page_Range: "210-212"
---

# 89. Engels to Marx. About 23 July 



**[p. 88]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 July 1860 Dear Engels,

On Monday evening Palmerston is to put forward his proposals on England's FORTIFICATIONS"—a big DODGE, this. It would be a good idea if you could let me have a short article on the subject for the Tribune by Wednesdayb (for it's not till Wednesday that I have to send the thing off from here).c

Salut.

Your

K. M. First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

89

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester, about 23 July 1860] Dear Moor,

You shall have the article on FORTIFICATION d if I can possibly manage it, but under no circumstances will you be able to get it by the first post.

What do you make of Kinglake's REVELATIONS?" It wouldn't be a bad thing at all if the magnificent magnanimity of the Prince Regent' in Baden-Baden197 turned out to be nothing more than a pauvre* stereotype of the Villafranca affair and Francis Joseph to

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on 23 July 1860 (The Times, No. 23680, 24 July 1860). - b 25 July - c About 24 July, Engels wrote the article 'British Defences'. - d F. Engels, 'British Defences'. - e Engels means Kinglake's speech in the House of Commons on 12 July 1860 on Napoleon Ill's policy vis-à-vis Italy (The Times, No. 23671, 13 July 1860). - f William, Prince of Prussia - « poor





**[p. 174]**

be the genuinely 'magnanimous man'. Your princes, by the way, would seem after all to have realised that this time their heads are at stake; not that that is going to save them.

Just now I am reading Ulloa's Guerre d'indépendance de l'Italie 1848/49. Of all the military scribblings that have come my way (by PROFESSIONAL WRITERS) this is the most idiotic and slovenly. His criticism is so much hot air, the facts are distorted or not properly known and invariably flung together in a jumble. This Ulloa, who was a captain in the Neapolitan artillery in 1848, has called himself 'general' ever since Plon-Plon took him under his wing. This gang pullulates with mysterious generals. Moreover, if this SPECIMEN is anything to go by, the Neapolitan officers must really be a rotten lot.

If Garibaldi doesn't make a move soon,198 things may turn out badly for him, unless the business in Naples goes well, winch doesn't seem likely by the look of it. No doubt there'll be a few more defections before Milazzo and Messina, but the prospects for an expedition to the Continent may deteriorate. The navy won't place any obstacles in his way for, after all, they have no wish to fight Italians, but there certainly seems to be a rabid gang within the Neapolitan army who might resist along with the foreigners, nor can G. afford a defeat. If he had 10,000 reliable men he could, of course, finish the whole thing off in three days. He must now have between 5,000 and 6,000 men, not counting the Sicilians, of course.

Enclosed five pounds; it may enable you to give poor Eccarius a bit of extra help.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



