---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "91. Marx to Engels. 29 July "
Page_Range: "212-213"
---

# 91. Marx to Engels. 29 July 



**[p. 90]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 July [1860]

Dear Engels,

The £5 arrived. Ditto the article." I shall send you the Report on FORTIFICATIONS.b Did you see Urquhart's lamentations on the subject in the latest Free Press of 4 JULY?' If you would care to write about it in English, and this would seem to be most apposite, you should send the thing here when it is finished. I would then see what could be done with publishers, or at worst get it into a revue or a weekly.199

What Kinglake saidd was correct, as is borne out by the absurd manner in which the Moniteur reported his speech.1

Salut.

Your

K. M.

91

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 29 July [1860]

Dear Engels,

Enclosed herewith the final nonsuit from the High Court.200 It would be useless to go on to the Supreme Tribunal. It would

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- Published in English for the first gart, 1913 t i m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'British Defences'. - b Report of the Commissioners appointed to consider the Defences of the United Kingdom; together with the Minutes of Evidence and Appendix; also Correspondence relative to a Site for an Internal Arsenal, London, 1860. - c 'Mr. Urquhart on the Invasion of England', The Free Press, Vol. VIII, No. 7, 4 July 1860. - d See this volume, p. 173. - e Le Moniteur universel, No. 197, 15 July 1860.



