---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "92. Engels to Marx. 1 August "
Page_Range: "213-214"
---

# 92. Engels to Marx. 1 August 



**[p. 176]**

simply add to the costs. It's imperative that I now send Weber his 32 talers 3 silver groschen and 6 pfennigs so that the chap can let me have the documents (including his indictment) by return. I need them for the pamphlet,3 which will be ready for my wife to copy (and she'll do it quickly) within the next 8-10 days.

What is to be done next (I mean in the newspapers)? A lawsuit like this (note, e.g., the deplorable tone, reminiscent of newspaper polemics, of the High Court's findings) is something I have not come across before. These Prussian curs need a thorough hiding. It's a good thing, by the by, that they've supplied me with 'material'.

Nevertheless, the craven rabble in the High Court did see fit to disallow Mr Vogt's insinuations about 'extortion', etc.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Eccarius has been lodging a few doors away from us for nearly three weeks now and is feeling better.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

92

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 1 August [1860] 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

End. £5, F/L 12596 for the expenses. Lupus absolutely insisted on standing £4 of it. So, here we have the celebrated High Court of the Miller of Sanssouci.192 I should like to know what its decisions and reasoning would have been, had a Prussian official been treated in this way instead of you.

It would be quite useless to set the Supreme Tribunal in motion; but might you not seek an opinion from a FIRST RATE Prussian LAWYER?

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt.



