---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "93. Marx to J. M. Weber. 2 August "
Page_Range: "214-215"
---

# 93. Marx to J. M. Weber. 2 August 



**[p. 177]**

Their muddled argument shows quite plainly that the rascals have been manipulated by the Ministry itself. They've no wish for a lawsuit that would create a scandal and might upset the drowsy harmony of universal 'ministerialism'. Moreover, Schleinitz himself would be convicted in the person of the National-Zeitung. Your enclosure returned herewith. But now press on à tout prix* with the pamphlet15 and publishing arrangements! If possible, I shall do something further for you on Caribaldi<: next week.

You might inquire from the Tribune whether they would like to have a series of 4 or 5 articles on RIFLED FIRE ARMS, INCLUDING ALL THE LATEST IMPROVEMENTS—I won't do the thing on spec.201

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zxvi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

93

MARX TO J. M. WEBER

London, 2 August 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Sir,

I regret that, having been out of town for a few days, I did not receive your letter until today.202 I enclose the sum of 32 Reichstalers, and, while tendering my best thanks for your careful attention to my affairs to date, would request you to go ahead with the appeal in the Supreme Tribunal. Though I do not expect to be successful, no stone should be left unturned in the endeavour to obtain justice. Legally the argument put forward by the High Court appears to me to be quite untenable.

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: a at all costs - b K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - c Engels wrote the article 'Garibaldi's Movements'.



