---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "94. Marx to Engels. 4 August "
Page_Range: "215-216"
---

# 94. Marx to Engels. 4 August 



**[p. 178]**

I should be exceedingly grateful if you would send me by return your petition of 21.6.60 or, should the latter have to remain on the files for the time being, ask your secretary to make a summary of the charges contained therein (along with a list of the documents supporting the individual charges) and remit me the same.

I have, Sir, the honour to be

Your obedient Servant

Dr Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

94

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 August [1860]

Dear Frederick,

Have sent the £5 to Weber. I am getting on with the pamphlet3 as fast as I can. What hinders me somewhat is the inability to write on certain days when my state of health is particularly "orrible'.b

I've decided, by the by, to go on to the Supreme Tribunal officials. They are now on vacation. Before they sit again, my pamphlet will have appeared (and with it my critique of the Prussian proceedings to date). We won't let the chaps off without a tremendous scandal.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Write something about Garibaldi for me by Wednesday.0

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, j O,]g Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - b In the original: 'öklich' instead of 'ekelig'. - c 8 August. Engels wrote the article 'Garibaldi's Movements'.



