---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "95. Engels to Jenny Marx. 15 August "
Page_Range: "216-217"
---

# 95. Engels to Jenny Marx. 15 August 



**[p. 95]**

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX203

IN LONDON

Manchester, 15 August 1860

Dear Mrs Marx,

I shall do the article,3 tant bien que mal,b if I possibly can. Today Siebel has landed me with a young fellow from Barmen, which means I can't do anything; however, I shall probably get down to it tomorrow. By the way, it's irresponsible on Moor's part not even to answer my questions concerning Siebel.204 For ten days now I've been putting off writing to S., and he might at least let me know what I am to tell the fellow. It's absurd, too, that nothing has yet been done about publishers; heaven knows how long negotiations will eventually take. Then, what with the notoriously dilatory methods of German printers, we'll find that we've arrived, piano ma sanoï in the year 1861 and there'll be no one to blame but Mr Moor himself, with his thoroughness and his failure either to do anything about publishers himself, or to put Siebel in a position to do something. Meanwhile, things will be in full swing everywhere in Europe, and the public will have lost all interest in who exactly belonged to the original Brimstone Gang,''5 how the pamphlet Zur Warnung*** came into being, or what is and is not true in Techow's letter.56 We're forever producing truly splendid things, but take care to see that they never appear on time, and so they are all flops.

An immediate riposte to Vogt three sheets long would, AFTER ALL, have been of far greater value than anything that has since been done. Insist for all you're worth on something being done—and done immediately—about a publisher, and on the pamphletd being finished at long last. Otherwise, we shall wreck all our chances and ultimately find ourselves without any publisher at all.

But now for something comical—a great secret, however, that mustn't go beyond the four walls of No. 9 Grafton Terrace. Just imagine! That ridiculous Siebel, arriving in Barmen, goes and falls head over heels in love with a philistine girl,c becomes engaged and intends to marry very shortly and settle down to a life of

[^1]: a 'The Sick Man of Austria' - b for better or worse - c slowly but surely - d Herr Vogt - e Reinhilde von Hurter



