---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "98. Marx to Engels. 27 August "
Page_Range: "219-220"
---

# 98. Marx to Engels. 27 August 



**[p. 182]**

Here at London I still live, and shall continue to live, in my old house, 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill. If you visit again London, I hope you will not again forget my address. Mrs Marx, moreover, was very disappointed in missing the occasion of making the personal acquaintance of a man whose great intellectual powers she has already become familiarised with by his writings.

Yours truly

A. Williams

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Revue d'histoire com- parée, t. IV, No. 1-2, Budapest, 1946

98

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27 August 1860

Dear Engels,

You can attribute my long silence to the persistently frightful state of my liver, as a result of which I have to devote every spare moment to work.

I wrote to Siebel re publishers ABOUT ten days ago42 and await his reply. The long delay is due partly to my relative inability to work and partly to the fact that it was not till recently that I had all the available material. By the by, I believe that, with the exception of the Italian affair206 (Austria's craving for intervention was a Bonapartist figment), nothing more is going to happen this year (write SOMETHING about Garibaldi. What do you think of Bangya's friend Türr?207), so there'll be an interim period during which pamphlets of this kind will still be readable.

The enclosed letter from Schily will tickle you very much. Let me have it back. Today I sent Schily your Nice, Savoy, etc.

ABOUT a fortnight ago I sent Dr Zimmermann (formerly chairman of a Prussian Municipal Court) a letter, in which I put to. him questions relating to my case (questions of form).42 However,

