---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "99. Marx to Engels. 29 August "
Page_Range: "220-221"
---

# 99. Marx to Engels. 29 August 



**[p. 183]**

he deemed it necessary to confer with other brethren of the same craft in Berlin. No doubt I shall get his written opinion in the course of this week. I shan't allow the Prussians to get off so lightly.

I'm in a great fix over money. Mr Weydemeyer's journal3 is already at an end; i.e. he has resigned from the editorial board and intends to go to New York as a SURVEYOR. However, his colleague11 is going to make the paper pay by selling it to a political party. Weydemeyer has at last come to realise that he's too honest for American journalism.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

How's business in Manchester? India? HOME MARKET?

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time

99

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 29 August 1860

Dear Engels,

Is there still an opening for Eccarius with the tailor in Manchester? If so, he must leave here as he's fit for work again (he's still living out here), business in London is bad and he would, besides, have to go back to the sweatshop.c

The wherewithal to send him up there with his FAMILY is heing procured down here.

For your information, I should tell you that I believe he is suffering from a disease of the spinal cord. His wife is a revolting creature, a curious amalgam of aspirations after respectability (CHURCHWARDENS DAUGHTER) and Irishness. Her housekeeping is sloven-

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Stimme des Volkes- b Julius Standau - c See this volume, p. 172.



