---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "100. Marx to Engels. 1 September "
Page_Range: "221-222"
---

# 100. Marx to Engels. 1 September 



**[p. 184]**

ly. As for him, his energy is of the passive kind—not at all active, particularly since the disease has grown worse. From the outset, therefore, he ought not to be cossetted in Manchester, should he come up there. For the thumbscrew will have to be applied to him, otherwise she will get ideas into her head.

I must have something about Garibaldi soon. That's the only thing that interests the Yankees.207

Today a letter arrived from my Berlin lawyera containing his petition to the Supreme Tribunal. You shall have it later. He himself hasn't properly grasped the point about the flysheet and Blindb; however, he's taken in the rest pretty well.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

100

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 1 September 1860

Dear Engels,

Herewith a letter from Weydemeyer. Secondly, a letter from my lawyer.c You should send me back the latter. Clearly the chap hasn't grasped the point about the flysheet and I'd let him have further information on the subject in the unlikely event of the Supreme Tribunal's referring the case back to the Municipal Court for an actual hearing. Here we have one of the beauties of Prussian jurisprudence. I have now been through five provisional courts to obtain 'bureaucratic permission' actually to conduct the lawsuit. Such things could only happen in the 'enlightened State' of Prussia.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a J. M. Weber - b See this volume, pp. 23, 42, 59-63. - c See previous letter.



