---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "103. Marx to Engels. 13 September "
Page_Range: "225-226"
---

# 103. Marx to Engels. 13 September 



**[p. 188]**

Masses of inquiries have reached me from Switzerland and America about the publication of the scrawl.

My wife sends her kind regards. For months I have avoided Freiligrath, not wanting to have a disagreeable encounter with him; nor, at a crucial moment, could I relish the cowardly hedging (on account of his business connection with James Fazy, who is his principal). {But what I thought particularly unseemly was the way he continued to consort with Blind on an intimate footing, after I had shown him legal documents proving that Blind had, under incriminating circumstances, extracted from Wiehe, the com- positor, a false deposition for publication in the Allgemeine Zeitung relative to the flysheet Zur Warnung.'2'"} Nevertheless, in the eyes of the world we are 'friends' just as we have always been. But intercourse between our families has been completely broken off. As you know, my wife is of a determined disposition.

I hope you will soon send better news of yourself. Salut.

Your

K. M.

103

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 13 September 1860

Dear Engels,

I hope to get an article from you for Saturday.b If at all possible. Herewith Zimmermannes legal opinion on the questions I put to him.' (To be returned to me next week.)

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart- Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: 11 like dirt - b 15 September - ' See this volume, pp. 182-83.



