---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "104. Marx to Engels. 15 September "
Page_Range: "226-227"
---

# 104. Marx to Engels. 15 September 



**[p. 189]**

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published -in English for the first time

104

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 September 1860

Dear Engels,

THANKS FOR THE ARTICLE. I enclose herewith Eichhoff 's piece" which, however, you must return to me intact within 2 or 3 days at the outside. It doesn't belong to me. The scrawl had no sooner come out than it was confiscated in Berlin. This copy is the only one to be had in London. Part II, about Patzke, etc., so badly written, is excruciat- ingly funny. Moreover, it shows you what those stinking courts of justice in Berlin are like. And the infamous press there, venting all of its liberal leonine courage on Bombalino and reserving none for its Patzke, its tribunals and its utterly contemptible Prince Regent.b

Garibaldi is a veritable godsend. OTHERWISE, Bonaparte would have been restored to popularity and sustained by the Russo- Prussian-Austrian Holy Alliance.2"

Our gentle Heinrich Bürgers—but you'll see this for yourself from the enclosed epistle from Lassalle (also to be returned)—has gone over to the Prince Regent. Lassalle wrote to me first, from Aachen, where he is taking the waters for gout. Amongst other things, he says that in Cologne and Düsseldorf, where the Workers' Associations have been reorganised under the leadership of two young barristers unknown to us,r my anti-Vogt pieced is eagerly awaited. Borkheim brought back the same news from

[^1]: ;1 K. W. Eichhoff, Berliner Polizei-Silhouetten, Berlin, 1860. - b William, Prince of Prussia - ' Ressel and Knorsch - à Herr Vogt

[^2]: 8*



