---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "105. Engels to Marx. 15 September "
Page_Range: "227-229"
---

# 105. Engels to Marx. 15 September 



**[p. 190]**

Salut.

Your

K. M. Apropos. The Neue Preussische Zeitung says the Demokratische Studien (Walesrode, Bamberger, Lassalle, Vogt, Grün, Oppenheim, etc.) were written by 8 genuine and 2 'artificial' Jews.

105

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 15 September 1860 Dear Moor,

will follow tomorrow, as will the Eichhoff/ which Gumpert is still reading. I found the letter from our Weasel most cheering, or, rather, it brought a smile to my lips; it's a splendid tonic for your

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , r [923 Published in English tor the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: I return herewith the legal stuff.d The letter from Jacob Weasele

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 187. - b ibid., pp. 192-94. - ' K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - d See this volume, p. 184. - e Ferdinand Lassalle - ' K. W. Eichhoff, Berliner Polizei-Silhouetten, Berlin, 1860.





**[p. 191]**

You must at all costs avoid having your pamphlet' printed in London. I immediately wrote to Siebel once again. Firstly, the thing would be confiscated at once, perhaps actually on the frontier or at Leipzig, and secondly, even if this didn't happen, distribution would again be so appallingly bad that no one would ever set eyes on the thing. The experience is one we have been through hundreds of times with émigré literature. Always the same ineffectuality, always money and labour gone down the drain—not to mention the irritation. And then, where's the money to come from? According to your letter, it will call for £50 to £60 or more, and Lassalle certainly won't get us £30. Come to that, the thing ought to be worded in such a way that it could be printed and distributed in Germany; of what use to us is a riposte to Vogt which no one ever sets eyes on? And I simply don't see why we need any confiscable content here. Even with the press regulations as they now are, you can still say enough to drive the Prussians mad, and that, after all, is preferable to satisfaction in partions'* of which the public remains unaware and which, as it were, you give yourself merely in private.

Some three weeks ago I sent an article on the RIFLE MOVEMENT' to the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung in Darmstadt and, because in my dealings, with those professional soldiers I couldn't risk sailing UNDER FALSE COLOURS, I told the fellows in an accompanying letter' that I had fought in the campaign in Baden on the side of the insurgents.212 They did print the article all the same and it has now appeared in English over here as well.g If possible, I shall

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 171. - '* who knows? - c Herr Vogt - d In partibus (infidelium) means, literally, in parts inhabited by unbelievers. The words are added to the title of Roman Catholic bishops appointed to purely nominal dioceses in non-Christian countries. Here they mean 'outside the sphere of reality'. - e F. Engels, 'Eine Musterung englischer freiwilliger Jäger'. - f F. Engels, 'To the Editor of the Altgemeine Militär-Zeitung'. - s The translation was made by Engels himself, with minor alterations. It appeared under the title 'A German Account of the Newton Review' in The Volunteer journal, for Lancashire and Cheshire, No. 2, 14 September 1860.



