---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "109. Marx to Engels. 25 September "
Page_Range: "233-235"
---

# 109. Marx to Engels. 25 September 



**[p. 109]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 September 1860

Dear Engels,

The family arrived back safely yesterday. With regard to the enclosed letter from Dana I should explain that, after your visit to London,217 I wrote to Dana4" saying I would rather he assigned the 'NAVY' article to some other contributor to the Cyclopaedia.218 After that, I didn't hear from him and thought the matter had been DROPPED until the enclosed letter turned up yesterday. If you could possibly do the thing—however briefly and superficially DOES NOT MAI PER—it would be of enormous help to me, particularly just now, since, to obtain a breathing-space, I was forced on 14 September to draw an anticipatory bill on Dana, having a life of 2 months (payable 2 months after date). When writing to him, I reminded him of our long-standing friendship, as this was, in fact, against the PRINCIPLES of the Tribune. However, my letter crossed his, so just now it behoves us to keep him happy, quite apart from the necessity of his continuing to believe that we can do everything. So, if it is at all possible, you would oblige me more than I can say by doing the thing. Ten pages was the maximum prescribed by Dana. FIFE DO ALSO, a if not otherwise feasible. The point is that something should go off.

What do you think of the Garibaldi situation? Kossuth was balked by Mazzini's intervention; he had been sent by Bonaparte. Garibaldi was to have by-passed Rome and marched on Venice direct.2'9

Now, ad vocem' Vogt. The thing's11 being printed here.

1. Money. All I have to pay is £25. £12 from Borkheim, Lassalle has promised me £8. There remains £5. The other printing costs, ditto distribution costs will be met by Petsch, the publisher. We are SHARERS TO EQUAL PARIS in the profits, after deduction and refund of

[^1]: How WITH Lamoricière?h

[^2]: •' Five will also do - b See this volume, p. 195. - ' as regards - d K. Marx, Herr Vogt.





**[p. 197]**

the costs. I told Petsch this was now the only condition upon which I would have the thing published in London.

2. The thing is not confiscable. This was a misapprehension on Lassalle's part. I had told him, on the contrary, that, though not confiscable, it could not appear in Berlin because no publisher there would print it because of the communist trial.44

3. We are no longer in the 1850-58 era. Petsch has his agents in Leipzig, Berlin, and Hamburg. So, the thing will be distributed through ordinary booksellers' channels in Germany. In Belgium, Switzerland, and America, Petsch will sell direct through his agents there, thus saving a great deal of time. Advertisements in the newspapers, booksellers' notices, etc., will be attended to here, with my assistance. We shall send Siebel 50 copies to be distributed to journals, etc. Confiscation I hold to be out of the question. Vogt is not the Prince Regent," and Stieber has officially fallen into disgrace. I am deliberately keeping myself en réserve where politics are concerned.

4. We are saving time, for in Germany we might spend months yet doing the rounds; also time on proof-correcting, etc. It is Petsch's first publication (along with an anti-About pamphlet of Borkheim's1'), and he will go to no end of pains, if only in his own interests.

5. If the thing goes well, as I have every reason to suppose, Petsch will publish pamphlets, whether by you or me, in German or English and put an end to BURKING by German publishers. (2 sheets already printed.)

On this occasion, therefore, necessity would appear to have been a-virtue. Qu'en pensez-vous?^ I believe that Po and Rhine'1 ditto Savoy,' etc., would have created much more of a stir had they come out here in London.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. You rightly considered Ex-Reichs-Vogt an unsuitable title. Karl Vogt seems unsuitable to me because I don't want to put 'Karl Marx' after Karl Vogt. Hen.ce my proposed title, Dâ-Dâ-Vogt. For, as I reveal in the section containing the critique of Vogt's

[^1]: a William, Prince of Prussia - b [S. L. Borkheim,] Napoleon III und Preussen, London, 1860. - c What do you think? - d F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - e F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine.



