---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "111. Marx to Engels. 2 October "
Page_Range: "238-240"
---

# 111. Marx to Engels. 2 October 



**[p. 201]**

occupy houses; the houses, therefore, are marked as being occupied by posting soldiers round the outside. In Schleswig

during a battle a Prussian captain received the order to occupy a farm, whereupon he posted his men round its perimeter fence, just as though on manoeuvres! Waldersee saw this with his own eyes. Prince Fr.' Charles, by the way, is by no means a bad chap as soldiers go and absolutely detests the pointless grind of the Prussian parade ground. But, whether he's any good as a commander, it is impossible to say

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, lid. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

111

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 October 1860

Dear Engels,

One of my letters must have failed to reach you, for I wrote and told you that my FAMILY was spending a week at the SEASIDE."

As regards Dana's pages,'1 one of your large pages (e.g. in Artillery) was the equivalent of one of Dana's.

My impression of Siebel's letter was exactly the opposite of yours,1 namely his helplessness. Meissner, by reason of the Demokratische Studien, is actually in the enemy camp. Moreover, it would appear from his private conversation with Siebel that he expected a 'dignified' discussion and regards Vogt as a great man. O. Wigand is a personal enemy of mine and, years ago, on my offering to entrust him with the Eighteenth Brumaire (even for nothing), wrote me a churlish reply.224 Oelbermann in Bonn is a mere fantasy. I know the meridian of Bonn. All in all, the pamphletd is pretty well unpublishable in Germany (especially as

Your

F. E.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 195, 196, 198. - b ibid., pp. 196, 199. - c ibid., p. 199. d K. Marx, Herr Vogt.





**[p. 202]**

Printing will go ahead more quickly this week at Hirschfeld's. He still had all kinds of stuff that had to be finished.

I shall think about the title again. The fact that Dâ-Dâ will PUZZLE your philistine pleases me and fits in with my SYSTEM OF MOCKERY and CONTEMPT.3 Nevertheless (the title will, of course, be printed last), I shall again discuss it exhaustively with my critical conscience.b

Contents are as follows: I. The Brimstone Gang. II. The Bristlers. III. Police Matters. 1. Confession. 2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten. 3. Cherval. 4. The Communist Trial in Cologne. 5. Joint Workers' Festival in Lausanne. 6. Miscellany. IV. Techow's Letter. V. Imperial Regent and Count Palatine. VI. Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. VII. The Augsburg Campaign. VIII. Vogt's Studien. IX. Agency. X. Patrons and Accomplices. XL Lawsuit against the National-Zeitung. XII. Appendices.

As you have no time just now for articles, write to me privately when anything of a military nature happens in Italy, informing me, quite briefly, of the chief points. I shall then myself DODGE what is necessary into shape.

J. Ph. Becker wants to go to Naplesc (accompanied by Schily). He wants to raise a German volunteer corps there. (!!!)

I am completely broke. If you could send me a £ or two before the week is out, it would be very WELCOME.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: The effrontery of The Times (yesterday's) in suggesting that Garibaldi inspired 'CONFIDENCE' SO long 'AS HE COULD BE BELIEVED TO BE THE

[^2]: AGENT OF THE SECRET INTENTIONS OF NAPOLEON IIT,A is t r u l y S t a g g e r i n g .

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 84. - b Marx apparently means his wife Jenny. - c See this volume, pp. 237, 246. - d The Times, No. 23739, 1 October 1860, leading article.



