---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "112. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 2 October "
Page_Range: "240-241"
---

# 112. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 2 October 



**[p. 203]**

Edwin James, the clown, was in such a FUNK that he fled all the way back to London, arriving the day before yesterday.220 In the Plon-Plonist Opinion nationale Kossuth has addressed a letter to Garibaldi, which was written both in the spirit and at the behest of the Bonapartists.

Your RIFLE articlea has gone the rounds of the London press226

and has even been discussed in the pro-government Observer. This was a SENSATION.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, lyjsj Published in English for the first time

112

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

[London,] 2 October 1860

Dear Lassalle,

Forwarded your letter to Freiligrath forthwith. When I wrote saying you should 'muster' a quota, I was, OF COURSE, deliberately using an ambiguous term. Only do not enlist the help of anyone who is not a personal friend of mine. I should be glad, by the by, to receive the contribution at an early date. Come to that, I don't believe it will be à fonds perdue for we shall at least recoup the cost of production. "* Engels wrote an essay on the English RIFLES c for the Darmstadt Militär-Zeitung, which he subsequently translated for the Manches- ter Volunteer journal. It has been reproduced and discussed by the entire London Press.226

From letters that have come to me straight from Garibaldi's camp, things would seem to be in rather parlous state. Cavour is actually Bonaparte's tool and controls Victor Emmanuel. Garibaldi is in a difficult position vis-à-vis Bonaparte and the Piedmontese army, the more so in that all the bourgeois and aristocratic riff-raff in Italy are on the side of Cavour. Somewhat to the

[^1]: a 'A Review of English Volunteer Riflemen' - b Money down the drain - c 'A Review of English Volunteer Riflemen'



