---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "113. Engels to Marx. 5 October "
Page_Range: "241-243"
---

# 113. Engels to Marx. 5 October 



**[p. 204]**

You will forgive me, if I do not reply to your letter this time, nor, indeed, write more than a few lines. Besides being taken up (agreeably) with proof-correcting11 and my habitual tasks, I have the added blessing of a most frightful catarrh, affecting the whole of the left side of my head.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

The Supreme Tribunal has not yet reached a decision. As soon as the case is disposed of and I am debarred from public proceedings, I shall publish a sheet (pamphlet), Prussian Justice2'21 over here.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart- Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

113

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 5 October 1860

Dear Moor,

Enclosed £5 note E/L 33688 Manchester, 12 Jan. 60. I would have sent it sooner, but Gumpert touched me for ten pounds, after which I had to wait a day or two so as not to make myself conspicuous by drawing a lot of money all at once.

As to printing in London, the chief consideration, of course, is that the thing' should appear and appear quickly; but printing in Germany was preferable and could undoubtedly have been arranged. However SHARP Petsch may be, a German publisher, e.g. Meissner (who is far from being the philistine you imagine him to

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: soldiers - >> of the pamphlet Herr Vogt - c K. Marx, Herr Vogt.





**[p. 205]**

be—just take a look at his list) is in a much stronger position to break the conspiration du silence. Nor do I account it in any way a blessing that the party is thus also compelled to invest capital, for we've little enough as it is.

Title—I would repeat, and this is quite definitely Lupus's opinion also, that at any rate, a title that requires one to read half the book before one finds out what it means could not be more unhappy. Your philistine has long since ceased to take such an interest in Vogt as to PUZZLE over why you should call him Dâ-Dâ. The only thing that can make Vogt interesting is his connection with Bonaparte and Plon-Plon, and this you must emphasise in the title, if you are to arouse the philistine's curiosity. So far as the title is concerned, your system OF MOCKERY AND CONTEMPT " is unlikely to produce anything but a title that is affected or contrived. A simple title is surely the best; MOCKERY AND CONTEMPT comes in the book soon enough.

So, père1' Garibaldi has drubbed the Neapolitans again after all, and taken 2,000 prisoners.228 The impression the chap makes on the troops must be tremendous. It's an excellent thing that Tün- should have been discredited along with Riistow's theory.' Otherwise, the latter would undoubtedly have taken it into his head to become the German Garibaldi; among the bourgeois republicans, the chap could come to be dangerous. It will probably be all up with Bombalino before long; the troops will soon have nothing left to eat and will disperse, for the area is not large enough to support them. Apart from that, there's nothing to be said about the affair for the time being. By the way, there's no denying that the rè galantuomod is playing his hand with a great deal of PLUCK if he should now go to Naples.

The success of my RIFLE article" was not altogether fortuitous. I sent the little sheet/ boldly marked in red, to the main London papers and the press up here and wrote to them more or less as follows: *The Correspondent, for England, of the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung presents his compliments to the Editor of the and begs to call his attention to an article of his in the Volunteer Journal (a copy of which is sent by post) on the Newton review. As this is the first professional opinion of a foreign military paper on the voluntary movement, it may be of interest.*—Quite anony-

[^1]: 11 See this volume, pp. 83, 202. - b father - c See this volume, p. 389. - d Gallant king (Victor Emmanuel II) - *" 'A Review of English Volunteer Riflemen1 - f The Volunteer Journal, for Lancashire and Cheshire



