---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "114. Marx to Engels. 11 October "
Page_Range: "243-244"
---

# 114. Marx to Engels. 11 October 



**[p. 206]**

mously, of course. I didn't write to The Times but they published an excerpt, nevertheless.3

Siebel has sent me a portrait of his betrothed,b very pretty. Marie Antoinette with just a tiny soupçon of the virtuous Eugénie, but exceedingly mannish, notwithstanding—SHE WILL WEAR THE BREECHES. His 'sensible creature' will surprise him yet. Madame la

baronne, her mother, was a milliner-cum-shop assistant in Düssel- dorf and is still said to frequent Kiipper's beer garden, where she puts away her 3 or 4 pints in an afternoon. Or so the philistines say.

According to the latest reports, Garibaldi is the grandson or great-grandson of the Dr Jos. Bapt. Maria Garibaldi of Ajaccio who was sent to Germany by King Theodore Neuhof, married Miss Katharina von Neuhof in Westphalia and, after the over- throw of his brother-in-law, settled in Nice.229 His face certainly has a Westphalian cast to it. Ewerbeck and Willich are both caricatures of G. in their own way.

In number one, volume three, of Kolatschek's German monthly there is said to be a very pointed article against Vogt.c

Kind regards to the FAMILY.

114

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 11 October 1860

DEAR Frederick,

I'm extremely busy at this moment. Shall write to you on Saturday.'1 Some good stuff in Brass's pamphlet."

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a 'A German Account of the Volunteers', The Times, No. 23733, 24 September 1860. - b Reinhilde von Hurter. - c [A. Kolatschek,] 'Die Juchheisten' in Stimmen der Zeit, October 1860. - d 13 October - e A. Brass, Was Noth ist, Geneva, 1860.

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



