---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "116. Marx to Engels. 25 October "
Page_Range: "245-246"
---

# 116. Marx to Engels. 25 October 



**[p. 208]**

the Appeal judge is based on an error in law. However, such an error is not evident in the present instance. The costs, etc'

How is your health? Mine is still pretty precarious. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. Ill, Stutt- eart-Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

116

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 October 1860

Dear Engels,

Herewith the letter from Weber, to whom I must therefore send ABOUT 6 talers; so ends the spree with Prussian justice." You can pass on this news to Siebel.

During the first 4 weeks, all went very slowly at Hirschfeld's, partly because Zinn, the compositor, left him in the lurch, and also because he had a great deal to do and one of my sheets amounted to more than 2 ordinary printed sheets. However, last week I entered into a written agreement with him whereby he has got to finish by 15 November.

In the last number of Stimmen der Zeit, Kolatschek has brought the thingc up again in the 'Juchheisten', in which friend Lassalle, among others, comes off "orribly'.d

How goes it with the Navye? Do you think there might actually be war this autumn?

[^1]: Later on, I shall publish ABOUT one sheet ON PRUSSIAN JUSTICE227 here in London, but not until the bookb is safely in Germany.

[^2]: a See previous letter. - b K. Marx's Herr Vogt. - c See this volume, pp. 206, 212. - d In the original: 'öklich' instead of 'eklig'. - e See this volume, pp. 196, 198.



