---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "118. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 5 November "
Page_Range: "247-248"
---

# 118. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 5 November 



**[p. 1922]**

willing to see to the copies (their despatch) for journals, etc., in Germany (and for which?). Needless to say, no reply.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

118

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

London, 5 November 1860

Dear Lassalle,

I herewith acknowledge with many thanks the £12, which arrived on Saturday." However, you should not approach the two people you name.b

Szemere's statement surprised me as much as anything emanating from the Hungarian emigration could surprise me.230 In no circumstances can Szemere be said to be guided by personal motives, but he suffers from 'statesmanship'!

As soon as I've done with the BUSINESS of printingc and at last have my hands free, I shall write to you at length.

Your

K. M.

This time there seems good reason to hope that victory in the United States will go to the REPUBLICAN PARTY (whose organ is the Tribune).'^^

I have today written to Weber, my lawyer, asking him to hand over the papers pertaining to the lawsuit to you,42 and would be glad if you would temporarily house them for me.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a 3 November 1860 - b Franz Duncker and Ludmilla Assing - ' Herr Vogt



