---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "120. Marx to Engels. 14 November "
Page_Range: "250-251"
---

# 120. Marx to Engels. 14 November 



**[p. 120]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] City, 14 November 1860

Dear Engels,

Our letters crossed.234 These few lines, acknowledging the £5 which arrived this morning, are being written at Borkheim's office.

There is a simple explanation for my having written so seldom of late, and then only a few lines at a time, namely overwork, indisposition and TROUBLE of all kinds. By the end of next week, when my hands will again be free, I shall be writing to you just as before.

I have today sent you by post the number of Stimmen der Zeit I mentioned yesterday,3 but I must have it back by next Wednesday15

at the latest, since it .is borrowed.

I shall include the notice from the Guardian,— which I found helpful, thank you for it—among the 'Appendices' in the concluding chapter.235

Biscamp married the day before yesterday: an American whore. Good luck to him!

Imandt has written. Has a daughter. Has grown thin as a rake, has been ill all the summer and still is. Pauvre diable!"

Borkheim sends his regards. B. has obtained permission from his firm to trade privately in wines and asks you to remember him, should you feel able to help him in this LINE (every conceivable type of wine).

No other news.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Siuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: See this volume, p. 212. - b 21 November - c Poor devil!



