---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "123. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 22 November "
Page_Range: "252-253"
---

# 123. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 22 November 

With the best compliments of Mrs Marx and myself

Yours truly,

K. Marx

The Courrier du Dimanche of Nov. 18 publishes a letter d.d. 'Vienna, 14 Nov. I860.'—which is written altogether in the sense [of] your public declaration.230

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Revue d'histoire com- parée, t. IV, No. 1-2, Budapest, 1946

123

MARX TO BERT ALAN SZEMERE

IN LONDON

[London,] 22 November 1860

My dear Szemere,

My best thanks for your friendly letter and the Kossuth- Cobden-Memorandum236 which I forgot mentioning in my last.

The state of Mrs Marx has not yet improved. Engels, whom you must consider as my alter ego and who is the author of the pamphlet 'Po und Rhein'b I gave you on a former occasion, lives No. 6, Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road, Manchester.

The Courrier du Dimanche I receive from time to time by a friend at Paris.' Is that Ganesco not a Wallachian? At all events, his name does not point to a French origin.

With my best compliments,

Yours truly,

K. Marx

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English), in Revue d'histoire com- parée, t. IV, No. 1-2, Budapest, 1946

[^2]: a [E. Biscamp,] 'Die politischen Emigrationen und die Tuilerien', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 312 (supplement), 7 November 1860. - b Po and Rhine- c Probably W. Schily



