---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "127. Marx to Engels. 28 November "
Page_Range: "257-258"
---

# 127. Marx to Engels. 28 November 



**[p. 127]**

MARX TO ENGELS239

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 28 November 1860

Dear Engels,

My wife is now out of danger. Tell Lupus straight away, and give him my warm regards. The thing will drag on for a long time, and, as Allen says, when she is well again, she must go away at once for at least 4 weeks.

As for myself—the danger of infection being greatest for 10 days as from yesterday—I had myself revaccinated yesterday. Ditto Lenchen. A circumstance that has been of great help to me was having an appalling toothache. The day before yesterday, I had a tooth pulled out. While the fellow (Gabriel, he's called) did, in fact, pull out the root, after causing me great PHYSICAL PAINS, he left in a splinter. So, the whole of my face is sore and swollen, and my throat half closed up. This physical pressure contributes much to the disablement of thought and hence to one's powers of abstraction for, as Hegel says, pure thought or pure being or nothingness is one and the same thing.

Well, during these ten days, the isolation will have to be more stringent than ever.

I cannot write, of course, while in this state and, since the bill of £50 drawn on Dana 2 l/2 months ago" has in any case not been properly worked off—my wife had all manner of NERVOUS COMPLAINTS even before her illness, so that sundry matters were left undone and hence I'm in a great fix—I would ask you, at least during the next fortnight, to do as much writing as possible. Under the present circumstances it might seem to be appropriate to write to my old lady.b But ever since she allowed the Prussian corporalc to marry into the family, all INTERCOURSE has ceased in consequence of certain remarks passed by me. There has been an appalling spate of dunning from all quarters. To alleviate it, in some quarters at any rate, I have handed out the greater part of the £10. I wouldn't write about all this to you, who already do all you can and more, but que faire? But what's to be done? Moreover, all

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 196. - b Henriette Marx - ' Johann Jakob Conradi (married Marx's sister, Emilie).



