---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "130. Marx to Engels. 5 December "
Page_Range: "260-262"
---

# 130. Marx to Engels. 5 December 

Lupus has specially requested me to tell you in advance how much he enjoyed the dressing-down you gave Mr Simon. The more I read of the book," the better it pleases me. But shocking misprints and spelling mistakes. Once there's Russian instead of Austrian Emperor. Moreover, it looks bad when all the foreign words that your wife wrote in roman characters are printed in roman type. This invariably happens in the case of foreign printers and special precautions have to be taken to avoid it.

What you have omitted are résumés. E.g. at the end of the 2 chapters: 'Bristlers' and 'Brimstone Gang'; again, after 'Police Matters', after all the personal business (i.e. before the 'Studies'), and elsewhere, résumés would also have been appropriate, for in that way you would have presented your philistine ad oculosb with a general impression. It would have meant only four extra pages and would have been extremely effective in a book in which the material and the innumerable names—the latter pretty well unknown to the said philistine—tend to be somewhat overwhelm- ing; it would also have brought out the artistry of the whole arrangement, which is truly admirable.

How is your wife?

Your

F. E.

130

[London,] 5 December [1860]

Dear Engels,

My wife is getting on very well, and I believe the wine is doing her more good than any medicine. But at night, when she is

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^2]: j Qj3 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: MARX TO ENGELS237

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: Best thanks for the article.240

[^6]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - b plainly and visibly





**[p. 224]**

restless, can't sleep, and is even a little delirious, it's still very disturbing.

How about letting me have another article by Saturday,3 about my lawsuit—perhaps, dated from Berlin? When I find writing LEADERS awkward, I date them from Berlin, Paris, etc. Such articles are easier to get through.

Might not something be said about the Chinese war? Or Bonaparte's military preparations, etc.?241

At the moment, I have absolutely no 'ideas' about anything. What I have got is an "orrible'b headache.

The children—poor little devils—are still living in exile.c To cheer them up, I have sent them a bottle or two of wine. The day before yesterday, the little one d saw me walking past Liebknecht's house and shouted from the window: 'HALLOO, OLD BOY!'

Apropos! As soon as Freiligrath heard of my wife's illness (didn't, of course, know what it was), he, of course, wrote me a letter full of 'feeling'. But when I sent him Herr Vogt—with, of course (you can see just how many ideas I have from the way 'of course' has cropped up 3 times in 3 lines), a friendly inscription, and he had occasion to write to me about SOMETHING ELSE, he forgot to say a word about the book, or TO ACKNOWLEDGE its receipt. To suggest that he had forgotten to do so, he wrote at the bottom of his letter, 'In great haste'. I believe there are certain parts that worry him stiff. Firstly, his 'indiscretion' re Vogt. But Fazy, in particular. He was intending to move to Geneva in the spring. One wonders whether the disclosure of the Fazy scandal might not prove a hindrance.

Blind, who had already ordered a copy from Petsch last Thursday," didn't get one until yesterday [Tuesday]. The thing wasn't distributed in London until then so as to prevent MR ALBERTS, OF THE PRUSSIAN EMBASSY, warning Berlin before my package of books arrived there. In London, of course, there have been a lot of jibes at my 'undignified' mode of attack. Twelve COPIES were ordered yesterday by that louse Trübner.

Salut. Your

[^1]: K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published ,n Engl.sh in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: " 8 December - b In the original: 'öklüchen' instead of 'ekeligen'. - c See this volume, pp. 214, 216. - d Eleanor Marx - e 29 November



