---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "131. Marx to Engels. 6 December "
Page_Range: "262-263"
---

# 131. Marx to Engels. 6 December 



**[p. 131]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 December 1860

Dear Frederick,

Best thanks for the £2. The OFFICE closest to me is the CAMDEN

T O W N MONEY OFFICE."1

As regards the want of résumés, you are perfectly right. They were there originally, but were deleted by me when I saw how much the affair had grown without my noticing it. For, printed in the normal way, the thing15 would amount to a very stout volume. You will find, by the by, that in Chapter XI, 'A Lawsuit', all the personal stuff is so thoroughly dinned into your philistine that it will remain with him for the rest of his days.

As for Monsieur Edouard Simon, the cur described you in his mud-slinging article242 (a malicious translation of Techow's 'police spy') as 'le mouchard toujours affairé'.' Whereat I took it upon myself to make an example of the laddie, since insults aimed at you vex me more than those directed against myself.

Apropos—BY THE BY—as soon as Lupus has got through the thing, I'd be grateful if he could drop me a line or two. My wife's greatest pleasure at the moment consists in letters about it. On the whole, she is getting on well, but slowly.

Mr Philistine Freiligrath, that 'snotty Westphalian snout',d wrote to me yesterday as follows:

What do you think of those two last sentences? The swine, who was already aware of Vogt's lies and Blind's turpitude, but now has them before him in black and white, is unwilling (not, mark you, that I invited him to do so) 'to enter into the case as such'. And 'now, as before,' he 'would sooner stand aloof from the whole

[^1]: 'Your book,' (not pamphlet, egad!) 'has been sent me by Petsch. Many thanks! From what I have read so far, I find it is, as I expected, full of wit and malice. There is so much detail as almost to make it difficult to get a general idea of it. You will excuse me if I do not enter into the case as such. Even today I still deplore the whole dispute from which now, as before, I would sooner stand aloof.'

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 222. - b Herr Vogt - c the ever busy spy - d J. Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengeheurliche Geschichtktitterung, Ch. 3, p. 68.



