---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "132. Marx to Engels. 12 December "
Page_Range: "263-265"
---

# 132. Marx to Engels. 12 December 



**[p. 226]**

dispute'. It now seems to me that he hasn't yet read the whole of it, for he would then see just where he stands. I have now discovered the secret of his intimacy with Blind (it is business, of course, that ties him to Vogt-Fazy). Namely, on the occasion of the Schiller festival, Freiligrath had 20,000 copies of his poema

printed at a cost of £40-60. He wanted to make a business of it. But didn't sell forty. Since his speculation had failed, it now behoved him 'to palm off the cost, as Petsch aptly put it, onto the Schiller committee./5 In this Blind was his most servile TOOL. Hincb

the 'reciprocal good turn' done by the snotty Westphalian snout.

You will find the misprints you repiobate listed in the errata. Originally, the list was 3 times as long. But since it looked bad, we shortened it. The fault lies entirely with Hirschfeld, a ninny who has no control over his compositor. Petsch isn't having anything else printed by him.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Should something or other occur to you that might do for a military pamphlet of 1-3 sheets, Petsch would be delighted, for he now wants to achieve the status of 'publisher and bookseller'. He's a very nice chap.

132

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 12 December [1860] Dear Engels,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: BEST THANKS FOR ARTICLE.240 The item in the Neue Preussische Zeitung (if one disregards their own comments) is no more than a paragraph that appeared in the

[^5]: a F. Freiligrath, Zur Schillerfeier. 10. November 1859. Festlied der Deutschen in London. - b Hence





**[p. 227]**

Londoner Lithographierte Korrespondenz (Schlesinger); with few exceptions, it was in all the German papers, for the most part under the heading 'London'.

The shorter version of the advertisement was confined to papers published in England. In the German papers, the table of contents was included.243

I am sending you herewith the advertisement in the Buch- händlerbörsenblatt,'' composed by Petsch himself. The well-known 'politician' he speaks of at the end is magnush L. Bücher, who indicated as much when talking to Borkheim.

The advertisements in the German papers probably appeared in the course of this week. A little after the book's arrival, it being undesirable (in view of the Lawsuit') to alert the Prussians.

Advertisements have been sent to the: Allgemeine Zeitung; Br e si au er Zeitung; Bund (Berne); Deutsche Allgemeine'^ ; Frankfurter Journal; Hamburger Nachrichten; Freischütz; Reform; Karlsruher Zeitung; Kölnische Zeitung; Königsberger Härtung"; Mannheimer Journal; National-Zeitung; Neue Preussische Zeitung; Publicist; Berlin Volks-Zeitung; Ost-Deutsche Post; Presse; Rostocker Zeitung; Schwäbischer Merkur; Trier'sche Zeitung; Zeitung für Norddeutschland; Zürcher Neue Zeitung1 ; Neue Süddeutsche^ (Munich); Morgenblatt; Wochenblatt des Nationalvereins"; Deutsches Museum; Illustrirte Zeitung; Ausland (Augsburg); Historische Deutsche Monatsschrift (Brunswick).

New-Yorker Staatszeitung; New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung; New-Yorker Abendzeitung.

Times; Athenaeum; Critic; Saturday Review; Illustrated News; Manchester Guardian; Hermann.

Copies sent inter alia to Cotta, the Reform, Duncker, 6 to Siebel; various to the English papers (Sat. Review, Athenaeum, Critic, III. News); Lommel, Brass, Fischel. Over 50 free copies despatched in all, but only a few of them to newspapers.

41 sold in London to date.

Nota bene: Lommel's Hinter den Coulissen is now in great demand in Germany. There have even been orders from Riga.

Bücher (who contributes articles to the supplement of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, e. g., the one on Persigny and

[^1]: a Advertisements about the publication of Herr Vogt appeared in the Börsenblatt für den deutschen Buchhandel, Nos. 150, 151 and 153; 5, 7 and 12 December I860. - b the great - c Reference is to Chapter XI of Herr Vogt. - d Deutsehe Allgemeine Zeitung - c' Königsberger Hartungsche Zeitung - ' Neue Zürcher Zei- tung - 8 Marx apparently means the Süddeutsche Zeitung. - h Wochenschrift des Nationalvereins



