---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "133. Engels to Marx. 18 December "
Page_Range: "265-267"
---

# 133. Engels to Marx. 18 December 



**[p. 228]**

Palmerston) has promised Borkheim he will write a review for the A. Z. I fear Biscamp may forestall him.

Liebknecht has placed advertisements and lengthy excerpts in 4 German-American and 4 English-American papers. He is now, I might add, literary correspondent to the last-named.

'Mr Vogt' writes signed articles for some of the more obscure American-German papers. Rails at 'Bonaparte'.3 Declared that my pamphlet would never come out.

My wife is much better. But the children probably won't be allowed home for another fortnight. I myself have to spend almost all day with her and am feeling far from well. However, that will resolve itself as soon as she is in a more normal state of health.

A week ago, Allen cancelled the prescription for claret and prescribed port instead. I should be grateful, therefore, if you would send me a few bottles of the latter.

My library has arrived.244 Still at the CUSTOM HOUSE, for the 'COMMISSIONERS' have not yet decided whether I am to have it DUTY

FREE.

Now, just guess how I got to the bottom of Ludwig Simon's secret. (See appendix 16c.b) Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

133

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 18 December 1860

Dear Moor,

In addition to Szemere, my brother-in-law' also descended on me on Sunday. Sz. is off to Liverpool today and may return;

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - b See K. Marx's Herr Vogt, present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 328-29, and this volume, pp. 234-35. - c Karl Emil Blank

[^5]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913





**[p. 229]**

my brother-in-law leaves tomorrow—so I've been in no position to do an article. Something on Austria" for Saturdayb if pos- sible.

As a person, Sz. is quite a decent chap; he has an Austrian's bonhomie and, at a time of revolution in Hungary, might even be energetic, resolute and clearsighted; but en dehors de son pays' he certainly has little in the way of knowledge or ideas. At any rate, I couldn't extract a great deal of sense from him in this respect. It's odd that, having adopted such a decidedly Bonapartist stance in his pamphlet,11 he should now have performed a complete volte-face. He made me, inter alia, the following conciliatory proposal: What, he inquired, would my attitude be if, given the disintegration of the Empire, the Habsburgs were to remain merely Kings of Hungary, and German Austria revert to Germany?e Whereupon I told him, of course, that such a solution might be perfectly acceptable to us and that we would gladly make the Hungarians a present of the whole robber band. His negotiations regarding the wine business here went off quite well. Cobden's recommendations and the acquaintances he struck up chez Cobden in Paris have made things much easier for him.

If at all possible, I shall send you another two pounds tomorrow; unfortunately it's too late today.

Regards to your wife, who is getting better, I hope, and the girls.

Your

F. E.

Apropos port! I've none left that's drinkable, but shall try and lay my hands on some decent stuff tomorrow and send it off straight away.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Engels wrote 'Austria—Progress of the Revolution' - b 22 December - c outside of his own country - d B. Szemere, La Question hongroise (1848-1860), Paris, 1860. - c See this volume, p. 230.



