---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "136. Marx to Engels. 19 December "
Page_Range: "268-270"
---

# 136. Marx to Engels. 19 December 



**[p. 135]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 19 December 1860

Dear Moor,

Enclosed the £2 on Camden Town. The more I read of the book,a the more difficult I find it to imagine how Vogt will pass off these stories that 'will never come out'.b 41 copies in London in a few days is a great deal; by now it will be even more. This is, of course, the best polemical work you have ever written; it's simpler in style than the Bonaparte' and yet just as effective where this is called for.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 10,13 Published in English for the first

136

[London,] 19 December 1860

Dear Frederick,

THANKS for the £2. I have sent Lenchen to the POST OFUCK to collect it.

My wife, or so Allen thinks, will not have any pock marks. She is, of course, still very indisposed (and it's precisely when they're recovering that sick people grow more restive and impatient), but Allen is perfectly satisfied with her PROGRESS.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS67

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - b See this volume, p, 228. - c K. Marx, The Eighteenth

[^4]: Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.





**[p. 232]**

As for myself, I am today (the worst thing was lack of sleep) much the better for having slept soundly all night and hope to be ALRIGHT again in 2, or, at the most, 3, days' time.

Having been too unwell to go out this week, I don't know how the book3 has been selling in London. Though I've been told by Liebknecht that the London Workers' Society3 has bought 6 copies for its library this week.

Zimmermann of Spandau (now a lawyer in London), formerly a member of parliament, bosom friend of Vogt, once a great traducer of the Volk and of my own person, last week gave a dinner at which the lawyer Höchster (connu1' from Elberfeld, now a very busy avocat in Paris) was present; our friend Rheinländer also attended. Zimmermann declared that Blind was hopelessly compromised. As TO Vogt, he [Zimmermann] had been reluctant to credit bribery, although aware of the chap's vanity and frivolity. But now my work had convinced him that Vogt was nothing but an ordinary 'mouchard'' only distinguished from muchardus vulgar- isd by the size of his salary, etc. Moreover, he (Z.) had written to acquaintances in Switzerland in order to leave Mr Vogt in no doubt about his views.

Bücher has written and told Borkheim that the case against Vogt has been fully proved. Also that my work had eradicated any 'prejudice he might have had against Marx's agitational activities'. He had, he wrote, expressed his views on these two points in the Camberwelle businessmen's circle (to which he gives lectures on the history of German jurisprudence) and written ditto to 'influential persons in Germany'.

Zimmermann and Bücher are of importance here because of the philistines.

In the course of my ordeal—during the past 4 weeks—I have read all manner of things. Inter alia Darwin's book on Natural Selection} Although developed in the crude English fashion, this is the book which, in the field of natural history, provides the basis for our views. By comparison, A. Bastian's Der Mensch in der Geschichte (3 stout volumes; the chap's a young Bremen doctor who has spent several years travelling round the world), with its attempt to present psychology in terms of 'natural science' and history in terms of psychology, is bad, muddled, and amorphous.

[^1]: a K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - b known - c police spy - d common police spy - e district in London - f Ch. Darwin, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, London, 1859.



