---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "137. Marx to Engels. 23 December : "
Page_Range: "270-271"
---

# 137. Marx to Engels. 23 December : 



**[p. 233]**

The only useful thing in it is a few ethnographical ODDITIES now and again. And, what is more, very pretentious and atrociously written.

Apropos. As regards Ludwig Simon, try and guess how I succeeded in catching out the gentle Kunigunde.a

Lassalle, from whom I got a letter a few weeks ago, is very ill. Not gout—osteitis? Is publishing, or so he writes, 'a long and important work' with Brockhaus in 2 volumes,b 17 hours in bed, 3 hours up, and busy proof-correcting this 'long and important work'. I can hardly suppose the anti-Vogt piece, which I sent him, will serve to alleviate his aches and pains. But whose fault is it that he's a Berlin 'idealist politician'?

Have I already written and told youc what a 'crassly material basis' there is to the intimacy between Freiligrath and student Blind d?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, , , . , , - ^ i- . • r „ r i Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and ^ f ! ^ m E n g' 1 S h '" f U" f ° r t h e

137

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 23 December 1860

DEAR Frederick,

My best thanks for the wine and the £5. My wife finds the port excellent.

I am my old self again today. Keil writes from Leipzig to say that, immediately on its arrival, the bookc sold 120 copies.

[^1]: Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: first time

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 234-35. - b F. Lassalle, Dos System der erworbenen Rechte, Leipzig, 1861. - c See this volume, p. 226. - d The nickname 'student' dates back to 1847, when Blind's name figured in the press in connection with the revolutionary movement. - e K. Marx, Herr Vogt.



