---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "139. Marx to Engels. 27 December "
Page_Range: "274-275"
---

# 139. Marx to Engels. 27 December 



**[p. 237]**

the rubbish into the hand of each arrival. Anyone who asked what it cost was relieved, according to his outward APPEARANCE, of 6d, 3d, or as little as Id. Anyone who didn't ask got the rubbish for nothing. And thus, even before Kinkel's speech" of F.'s cantata1' was d u e to take place, the Badenese slyboots had gone one better and forced his trash onto all and sundry.

Salut. T h e children at home again. Regards to Lupus,

Your

THANKS FOR THE ARTICLE/

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

139

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27'December 1860

In great haste Dear Engels,

A letter has just arrived from J. Ph. Becker in Naples, asking that Borkheim send him by return for Garibaldi: 1. Po and Rhine? (I still have one copy of it that I discovered at Petsch's. So, that's ALL RIGHT.)

2. Savoy, Nice and the Rhine? (My copy went to Schily long ago. I hope you have one and would ask you to despatch it forthwith by post to S. L. Borkheim, 44 Mark Lane, City, London.)

K. M.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: 3. Herr Vogt. Salut. Your

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, • qja Published in English for the first time

[^3]: " G. Kinkel, Festrede bei der Schillerfeier im Krystallpalast, London, 1859. - b F. Freiligrath, Zur Schillerfeier. 10. November 1859. Festlied der Deutschen in London. - <•' F. Engels, 'Austria—Progress of the Revolution'. - d F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - ° F. Engels, Savoy, Nice and the Rhine.



