---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "140. Marx to Engels. 3 January "
Page_Range: "275-276"
---

# 140. Marx to Engels. 3 January 



**[p. 1861]**

140

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 January 1861

Dear Frederick,

I have mislaid your letter received this morning232 and hence cannot remember how much it would cost to send the Revelations" to Petsch. Those I still had in stock had already been sent to him last week.24'

Have heard from Siebel. He had just returned to Elberfeld after spending his honeymoon in Paris. Has distributed the 6 copies and ordered 6 more.6 It would be a good thing if you could give him some advice as to how it should be advertised.

The most ghastly misprint (not listed) in Herr Vogt, repeated 3 or 4 times, was 'Nationalrat' [National Council] for 'Ständerat' [Council of States]. I have got Petsch to send out a correction explicitly to the Genfer Grenzpost.

The King of Prussia'sd death is most opportune. Qu'en dites-vous?"

My wife is improving daily, although she's still very weak. On Saturday, I emptied the last medicine bottle.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Tobyc has let out a prolonged cry of pain in the Freischütz.248

[^2]: Borchardt has yet to be hauled over the coals.f

[^3]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - b K. Marx, Herr Vogt. - c Marx refers to Eduard Meyen comparing him to Punch's dog. Punch is one of the main characters in the traditional English puppet-show, Punch and Judy, from which the famous comic journal takes its name. On this, see also K. Marx, Herr Vogt, present edition, Vol. 17, p. 239. - d Frederick William IV - e What do you think of it? - f See this volume, p. 240.



