---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "141. Marx to Carl Siebel. 3 January "
Page_Range: "276-277"
---

# 141. Marx to Carl Siebel. 3 January 



**[p. 239]**

T h e whole FAMILY asks me to send you their warmest greetings and best wishes for the New Year. My letter's so short because my brother-in-law and sister1' are here. They sail tomorrow for the Cape of Good Hope.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart. JO.JH ' Published in English for the first time

141

MARX T O CARL SIEBEL

IN ELBEREELD

London, 3 January 1861 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Siebel,

As for the Kölner Anzeiger, you might use this little sheet as a weapon against the Kölnische Zeitung. Sales of the book are going so well that Petsch is 'contemplating' a second edition. In such an event, it would be of the utmost importance that you should, if possible, supply me with everything that appears about it in Germany (I see nothing here but the

[^1]: HAPPY NEW YEAR! T o you and your BETTER HALF. I must acknowledge with many thanks the arrival of my library,211 ditto of your letter.

[^2]: Of the 6 COPIES of Herr Vogt you ordered, will you kindly send one to the Kölner Anzeiger, one to the Zeitung für Norddeutschland (Hanover), 3 to any literary journals you please. T h e main thing is that you yourself should read through a copy and yourself do a notice of it.

[^3]: Allgemeine Zeitung, the Neue Preussische Zeitung, and the Volks- Zeitung), and keep me au courante Ed. Meyen has already vented a heartrending 'cry of pain' in the Freischütz.'248 Vivat sequens!'

[^4]: Johann Carel (Jaan Carel) and Louise Juta - h in the know - c Long live the sequel!



