---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "143. Engels to Marx. 7 January "
Page_Range: "278-279"
---

# 143. Engels to Marx. 7 January 



**[p. 143]**

ENGELS TO MARX249

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 January 1861

Dear Moor,

The Revelations* will be despatched from here today or tomorrow post-paid to Petsch. The fellow had best stick a small label on the title page—London, A. Petsch & Co., 1861—so that people know where it is to be had.

Can't you get me Toby's cry of pain2''8? Shall write to Siebel. In none of the German papers save the Kölnische'3 have I found so much as an advertisement—which is surely odd.

Our old enemies are not escaping the fate they deserve. The editor en chef of the late lamented Strassburger Correspondent was, according to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung,^ "a certain Mr Wolfers of Cologne"—the worthy Wolfers of Dumont's paper'1— couldn't you somehow convey this to Biscamp for transmission to the Augsburg A. Z.? Also, that the chap is not a Rhinelander but a beastly Belgian. Schwanbeck dead of delirium tremens, the worthy Brüggemann disappeared and consigned to oblivion, and Wolfers openly in the pay of Bonaparte—what more can you ask?

Doubtless King William I will now make a real ass of himself as well. When he tells the Berliners that much has happened that was unjust,e perhaps he is referring to the enforced dismissal of Stieber.250 Apropos. Another friend, griffin Greif1 would appear from a report in the Neue Preussische Zeitung K to be gravely ill as the result of an apoplectic fit. It's a good sign, these chaps being bowled over like ninepins. That the change of monarch251 should go so nicely hand in hand with the Austrian revolution252 of all things, is capital. Even the Wochenschrift des Nationalvereins11 now

[^1]: 11 K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - ll Kölnische Zeitung, No. 341, 8 December 1860. - c Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 1, 1 January 1861. - d Kölnische Zeitung- e [King William I's speech to a deputation of Berlin municipal officers on his ascension to the- throne,] Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 5, 5 January 1861. - f Engels has 'Vogel Greif, which means both 'bird Greif (a personal name), and 'bird griffin'. - £ Neue Preussische Zeitung, No. 2, 3 January 1861. - h 'Heidelberg, 21. December', Wochenschrift des Nationalvereins, No. 35, 28 December I860.



