---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "144. Marx to Engels. 8 January "
Page_Range: "279-281"
---

# 144. Marx to Engels. 8 January 



**[p. 242]**

declares that, unless Prussia moves fairly quickly, Austria will inevitably gain ascendancy in Germany. Things are going famously in Austria. Nothing could be more favourable than that stubbornly irresolute jackass Francis Joseph. Things are going famously and will be getting too much for Mr Bonaparte as well as for Franzi.

In North America things are also hotting up. With the slaves the situation must be pretty awful if the SOUTHERNERS are playing such a risky game.203 The least irruption of irregulars from the North might result in a general conflagration. At all events, one way or another, slavery would appear to be rapidly nearing its end and hence also COTTON PRODUCTION. What repercussions this will have on England we shall soon see. And with such powerful movements under way, a jackass like Bonaparte thinks he can go on fishing in troubled waters indefinitely.

Many regards,

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgig Published in English in full for the first time

144

[London,] 8 January 1861

Dear Frederick,

I myself only had Toby's cry of pain248 for rapid perusal. Last week, by the way, I ordered 2 COPIES through Petsch, one of which you shall have.

Siebel's present address is Carl Siebel jun., Barmen (Kleine Wertherstrasse, No. 25).

Petsch has already advertised the Revelations'1 in the Buchhändler- Börsenblatt.1' I've forbidden him to do so elsewhere out of consideration for Schapper.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS67

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - h Börsenblatt für den Deutschen Buchhandel, Nos. 150, 151 and 153, 5, 7, and 12 December 1860.





**[p. 243]**

As regards booksellers' advertisements of Herr Vogt, I have so far seen them only in the Reform," the Publicist^ the Freischütz,' and the Grenzpost.A Incidentally, I got Petsch to write, under my supervision, to all the chaps concerned, and thus the mystère will resolve itself within the next few days. He thinks it doesn't depend on the newspapers but on the booksellers, who have been putting the thing off until after Christmas and the New Year. And the advertisement goes into the newspapers only through the agency of the bookseller who is responsible for local sales. Mais nous verrons!e

You can see what a hapless creature I am! Last Wednesday/ (JUST A WEEK AGO) I got a cold and cough accompanied by a stabbing pain in the region of the liver, so that not only coughing, but turning my carcass from one side to the other, caused me physical PAINS. This seemed to me to indicate an inflammation. It was the first time I had felt a dolorg of this kind, although Allen had often asked me searchingly whether I had. This time—particularly since I am already encumbered with a hair-raising DOCTORS BILL, not to mention other BILLS,— I have so FAR been treating myself. The treatment was simple—no smoking, CASTOR OIL, drink only lemonade, eat little, no spirits whatever, do nothing, stay at home (since the cold air at once sets me coughing). I'm not quite well yet and somewhat weak. By the by, you might sometime ask Gumpert what one ought to do about such acute attacks, should they recur. I shall ask Allen as soon as I can go out again and am once more completely fit.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

My wife (who is slowly improving, but still very weak) and the children send their regards.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwis- Printed according to the original chert F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stutt- sart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: 11 Die Reform, Nos. 148, 150 (supplement) and 152, 10, 15 and 19 Decem- ber 1860. - b Publicist, Nos. 295 and 296, 15 and 16 December 1860. - c Der Freischütz, No. 150, 15 December 1860. - d Genfer Grenzpost, No. 12, 22 December 1860. - c But we shall see! - f 2 January - s pain



