---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "146. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 16 January "
Page_Range: "282-284"
---

# 146. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 16 January 

them,—then indeed everyone deserves to be pilloried. Mr Marx is a master of constructive denunciation. Vidocq, Ohm, Stieber, etc., are mere lambs by comparison. Many will delight in wading through this churned-up filth, for it is masterly calumnya; but we would urge caution on our readers: in the simian wilderness there are malicious baboons who, for want of other weapons, resort to ordure with which they bombard friend and foe alike. Beware: Throughout almost the whole of his 190 pages Mr Marx engages in this type of strategy, a type which eschews all expenditure on ammunition. Read it, by all means, but keep close at hand a basin of water and strong soap, not forgetting your smelling bottle!

H. B.'

Such is Gottfried's Beta (Betziche), former editor of Drucker's How Do You Do, and Gottfried's eulogistic arse-crawler in the Gartenlaube, etc. A fine crew! What a style and what nonsense!

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

Published in English for the first time

146

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE255

London, 16 January 1861 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, H aver stock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

D'abord^ my best if belated wishes for a Happy New Year. My wife is now convalescing. Her illness resulted in my falling seriously ill myself; and, at present, I am suffering from inflammation of the liver. And a very nice New Year's gift too! Hitherto, the complaint has merely been chronic. Now it is becoming acute.

This is the explanation for my silence, despite the very close sympathy felt both by my wife and myself for your sufferings. I hope that when you next write you'll have a better account to give me of yourself. If you would care to send me a fairly detailed report on your illness, I shall consult a doctor whom I regard as a veritable aesculapian genius." However, he does not live here, but in Manchester.

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: a Bettziech has 'Calummie' instead of 'Calumnie'. Marx underlines the sixth letter to draw attention to the misspelling. - b First. - c Dr Eduard Gumpert



I was greatly tickled by the Royal Prussian Amnesty2'0 which in effect excludes all refugees from its indulgence. Gottfried Kinkel, who has recently joined the National Association,2'7 could, however, return, if a correct interpretation were put on the 'act of grace'. As for Bucher, Freiligrath, Borkheim, Zimmermann of Spandau, and many others, they have long been 'naturalised Englishmen'.

Faucher, former London correspondent of the Neue Preussische Zeitung, afterwards co-editor of the (MANCHESTER SCHOOL"'") Morning Star,— a chap, by the by, with whom anyone can consort since he does not conceal but, indeed, openly flaunts, a lack of character typical of the Berliners, and who isn't actually taken politically au sérieux'' by any of his acquaintances,—believes that he can now play the Prussian Cobden. Good luck to him. Such, at least, was his plan when he left London.

One of my friends, f. Ph. Becker, is at present with Garibaldi in Caprera. He has written, telling me that the Mazzinists were almost exclusively responsible for the serious part of the south Italian movement, that Garibaldi does not exactly possess a superfluity of brains, and that the utmost confusion reigns in his friends' camp. Garibaldi, by the by, agrees with Mazzini in believing that Cavour isn't even well-intentioned with regard to Victor Emmanuel, that he is rather Bonaparte's direct tool and that the Gaeta intervention,"'9 as well as Farina's appointment to Sicily and Farini's to Naples, etc., are nothing but carefully calculated moves to compel Vic. Em. to make fresh territorial concessions to France, and concessions in favour of Murat in southern Italy. Which will succeed, and soon become manifest.

The slavery crisis in the United States will bring about a terrible crisis in England in a year or two; the Manchester COTTON LORDS are already beginning to tremble.

I seldom read German stuff. Recently, however, I happened upon A. Bastian, Der Mensch in der Geschichte, etc. I think it's a bad book, formless and pretentious. His endeavour to explain psychol- ogy in terms of 'natural science' amounts to little more than a pious wish. His endeavour to explain history in terms of 'psychology', on the other hand, shows that the man does not know what psychology is, or, for that matter, history.

Darwin's workh is most important and suits my purpose in that it provides a basis in natural science for the historical class

[^1]: •' seriously - b Ch. Darwin, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. London, 1 Hr>9.



