---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "147. Marx to Engels. 18 January "
Page_Range: "284-286"
---

# 147. Marx to Engels. 18 January 



**[p. 247]**

I have lately had the opportunity of seeing rather more German newspapers. Ghastly stuff. And, withal, a self-satisfied mediocrity which is indeed NAUSEOUS.

Could you send me the 2nd volume of Eichhoff's Polizei- Silhouetten? Not to be had here.

Another thing I have just read is Walesrode's Totenschau? Has some nice tales! But lamely presented, though this is excusable in view of the time of its publication.

Wishing you all good health, and with regards from my wife,

Your

K. M.

Mieroslawski, who has just been in Paris, told my friend Schily that things looked 'bad'. At the same time, he expressed himself most unfavourably with respect to 'Klapka'. Yet I myself can't quite make up my mind about Mieroslawski.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. Ill, Stutt- eart-Berlin 1922 Published in English in full for the first time

147

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 18 January [1861] Dear Frederick,

You must excuse my failure to acknowledge receipt of the £3 ere now. On Monday I had a relapse and, since there was no sign of improvement on Tuesday, I had to have recourse to Allen again, so that I am at present UNDER MEDICAL TREATMENT. Writing means that I have to stoop, which hurts, and so I kept putting it off. As you see, I am as tormented as Job, though not as god-fearing.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a [L. Walesrode,] Eine politische Todtenschau, Kiel, 1859.



I'd be glad if you would let me have for The Times a short critique in English of the Prussian amnestyb2S6—because of Allen's orders that I should refrain altogether from writing for at least another week. The following are the main points to be emphasised:

1. That the amnesty is the lousiest to have been proclaimed in any country (not excluding Austria) since 1849; (mesquin^ typically Prussian);

2. That the state of the 'liberal' Prussian press may be judged by the plaudits it bestows upon this piece of ordure;

3. That, whenever a new government comes to power in Prussia, an amnesty is proclaimed in respect of certain minor mis- demeanours, resistance to gendarmes, insults to officials, etc., and that the present amnesty is in fact no more than this.

4. In effect all refugees—i.e. all who took part in the revolution of 1848/49—are excluded from the amnesty. The prospect held out to those refugees 'liable to be sentenced by Our civil courts' and who are permitted 'to return without let or hindrance' (as though everyone had not always been 'legally' entitled to return), is that the Ministry of Justice will 'ex officio' lodge 'pleas for clemency' on their behalf. This, in effect, guarantees nothing. This absurd formula was chosen presumably because Prussia is a 'state under the rule of law' whose constitution precludes the king from suppressing any judicial inquiry. A pretty mockery in a state where, on the admission of the Prussian Gerichtszeitung (in Berlin), there has been no justice for the past ten years. Furthermore, sentences in absentia could be AT ONCE pronounced and quashed. This 'legal' coquetry is indeed deserving of recognition when Stieber, Greif, and Goldheim continue to be left at large—ditto Simons, Manteuffel, etc.

5. Beastliest of all is § 4 of the amnesty, whereby 'all those liable to be sentenced by military tribunals in the near future' must first 'appeal' for William's 'clemency', whereupon he 'will reserve his final decision until such time as he has received a report from Our Military Department of Justice'.

[^1]: a Herr Vagi - h See this volume, pp. 249 and 253. - c mean



