---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "148. Marx to Engels. 22 January "
Page_Range: "286-288"
---

# 148. Marx to Engels. 22 January 



**[p. 249]**

Consider in this connection that, given the Prussian Land- wehr's41 constitution, it is most exceptional for a Prussian refugee to be outside the jurisdiction of a 'military tribunal'; that the 'plea for clemency' is categorically prescribed, and nothing positive is promised in return for this humiliating procedure; finally that, more than any refugee, William himself is in need of an 'amnesty' since, from a strictly legal standpoint, he had no business to intervene in Baden,21'0 etc.

The Times will undoubtedly accept a critique of this kind with the utmost pleasure. I would send it simultaneously to other papers as well, just signing it, of course, 'A PRUSSIAN REFUGEE'. At the same time, I would write a personal letter to the Editor.3

It is the only way we can give these Prussian dogs, and the corporal1' in charge of them, their deserts.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Engl.sh for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

148

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 22 January [1861]

Dear Frederick,

Today I promptly sent off two COPIES (one to The Times, one to the Standard) of the statement about the AMNESTY.'

You will have seen in the Prussian press how Gottfried'1 is again pushing himself into the foreground via the newspaper mob.

The advertisement (bookseller's) for my book has also appeared in the Neue Preussische Zeitung. This week it has again been sent to all the Berlin papers. The scoundrels on both sides intend to burke the thing.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: What do you think of the statement by Bucher et cie?2b<

[^3]: J See this volume, p. 248. - b William I - ' ibid., pp. 248, 249. - d Kinkel





**[p. 250]**

As to my condition, Allen is of the same view as Gumpert. But, whatever it may be, it is a highly disgusting condition, which incapacitates one for work. There is also some attendant physical pain, though today it's much better. I'm still taking medicine and Allen calls every three days. He was here again today. Riding, CHANGE OF AIR, etc. But I can't, of course, tell him where the shoe pinches. I have wondered off and on whether I might not fix something up with a LOAN SOCIETY through Borkheim so as to put my affairs in some sort of order, these having become much disorganised as a result of medical expenses, the impossibility of drawing on the Tribune, etc. But each time I get to the point, my heart sinks into my boots, for Borkheim (despite all his GOOD QUALITIES) is a braggart and every day—or rather each time I see him—he goes on about the money he is owed by refugees.

If you could send me an article whenever you have the time and the inclination [it would]a be very welcome. I am still INCAPABLE. Most welcome of all would be an article from you for Saturday13

on French armaments,0 or on things French generally.

In my view there is no alliance between Russia on the one hand and Prussia and Austria on the other. It's simply that Russia, who always protects herself on two sides, has concluded certain agreements (relating to Poland and the Danubian Principalities) with the chaps in Warsaw262; but it's also quite certain that she has struck a new bargain with Bonaparte against other 'contingen- cies'.

Apropos: It might, perhaps, be even better if you wrote about Schleswig-Holstein.d One point: the foul behaviour of the Berlin press, which constantly abuses Austria for 'impeding' Prussia's anti-Danish moves. Now that Austria has given its consent, it wails about 'snares', issues warnings, urges peace, etc. Vide Volks-Zeitung, Kölnische Zeitung, etc. See that you lay about the Berlin press. In the past I used to do so frequently in the Tribune. But it has to be constantly repeated.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Manuscript damaged. - b 26 January c See this volume, p. 257. - d Engels wrote the article 'German Movements'.



