---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "149. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 January "
Page_Range: "288-289"
---

# 149. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 January 



**[p. 149]**

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

[London,] 28 January 1861

Dear Lassalle,

I am writing to you today in some haste, not from home, but from the City. In a few days, you shall have a longer letter and a reply to all your inquiries. First, my thanks for your package. I have passed one COPY of the petition to Freiligrath. Engels will receive No. II; No. Ill will be retained by me. It is a truly splendid document and is part and parcel of the history of the present era.

Perhaps you would be good enough to see that the enclosed note is delivered to Mr Eichhoff without delay.264

Owing to the current state of your health, friendly duty precludes my spurring you on to fresh labours. OTHERWISE I would have declared an anti-Zabel pamphlet, such as you envisage, to be a political deed.

My wife sends her kindest regards to you and the countess.3 Her convalescence is proceeding satisfactorily. I, for my part, expect I shall be able to forego all medicine for some time to come (I finished the last BOTTLE yesterday).

My best respects to the countess. In my next letter to you I shall take the liberty of enclosing a line or two for her.

K. Marx

[^1]: Tout à voush

[^2]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe vnd Schriften, Bd. Ill, „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , , Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Sophie von Hatzfeldt - b Ever yours.

[^4]: 10—558



