---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "150. Marx to Engels. 29 January "
Page_Range: "289-290"
---

# 150. Marx to Engels. 29 January 



**[p. 150]**

MARX TO ENGELS67

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 January 1861

Dear Engels,

When misfortunes come, they never come singly, as you will see from the enclosed letter from Dana. They have protested a bill for £30 I drew on them at 2 months' date on 10 December and, furthermore, have cancelled all articles for the next 6 weeks. Yesterday I went straight to Freiligrath, of course, and, if he is to have adequate security, about the only way out is for him to try and discount a bill which I shall give him on myself at 3 months. How I shall continue to make SHIFT here I can't imagine, for the rates, school, house, GROCER, butcher and God knows what else are denying me any further RESPITE. What a dirty trick it was of Dana's to refer in his statement of accounts to the critical period of 1858/59 when my contributions were reduced to 1 article per week purely as an exception*" an agreement that was in any case rendered null and void years ago per usum'' and, what's more, explicitly by letter. Now he is deducting all the articles they didn't print last year. Conversely, allowing his incorrect assumption that the agreement of 1858/59 remains in force, he would still not have the right to condemn me to IV2 months' idleness. And yet there's no action I can take against the chaps, since I'm entirely dependent on them. I really don't know what to do, though I have long seen this crisis looming up.

Lassalle's letter also enclosed. In his present missive, he shows no sign of remembering the impression Vogt's rubbish2" had made on him. Still, it is better to see the light late rather than not at all. As to his proposed revival of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung—la Hatzfeldt, about whom I enclose a memorandum2" for you, has 300,000 talers at her disposal — I would, circumstances being what they are, clutch even at this straw, but the tide in Germany hasn't risen high enough yet to bear our ship. The thing would prove abortive from the very outset.

Toby1' has again written to Borkheim, inquiring whether it was true that he had never heard about our £90 refugee affair. I was

[^1]: iw.< despised in Germany, he said, hence the universal silence. Even

[^2]: 11 by visage - •> Eduard Meyen



