---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "151. Marx to Engels. 31 January "
Page_Range: "290-291"
---

# 151. Marx to Engels. 31 January 



**[p. 253]**

the great L. Walesrode has declared that no one need reply to such scurrilities, etc. En passant, I should be grateful if you would send Borkheim—seeing that he contributed £12 to Herr Vogt—a reply to his letter. It is a point upon which he is very touchy.

Bücher and Rodbertus, who had been on the list of deputies for Berlin, were struck off by infuriated Little Germans266 following the publication of their statement.26' The latter is bad, but the way Bücher serves G. K. (Gottfried Kinkel) in the last issue of the Hermann* is good.

Mr Kolatschek wrote yesterday asking for a complimentary copy of Herr Vogt in order to review it. This has been sent. There have been relatively large sales of the pamphlet in Petersburg and Riga; on the other hand, nothing (maybe 6 copies) in Cologne.

The story Lassalle tells about Zabel is a good one.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

The swinish Times didn't take your amnesty piece.b Nor did the Standard. Now get the thing into the Guardian, which you should send down here and from which I shall take it and arrange through Borkheim for it to appear in the swinish Hermann, etc., and elsewhere.

151

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 31 January [1861]

DEAR Frederick,

Letter containing £10232 received with very many thanks. I must now be off, mainly for the purpose of paying the gas and rates, otherwise the fellows will send in the BROKER. AS for the other cads, I shall have to see how I can arrange matters with them.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stutteart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: ;1 I.. Bucher. [Letter to the Editor of Hermann.] In: Hermann, Nr. 108, 26. January 1861. - '• See this volume, pp. 248-49.

[^4]: 10*



