---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "153. Marx to Engels. 2 February "
Page_Range: "292-293"
---

# 153. Marx to Engels. 2 February 



**[p. 153]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 2 February 1861 Dear Frederick,

Yesterday I got the enclosed note from Freiligrath3 which doesn't make matters any more agreeable. You must write and tell me at once what I ought to do.

In fact, I've been so BOTHERED from all sides that my head is going round and round and, on top of that, there is the unpleasantness of having to annoy you with all my petites misères.

I have written to Dana, who is definitely in the WRONG legally, but with little prospect of success.b The fellows know that one needs them and that they, for their part, don't need one at this moment.

Weren't you going to send me the Nazione—certain letters of Mazzini's? Forgotten? You will shortly be getting the confiscated issue of the Courrier du Dimanche from me.

Bucher maintains—he asked Borkheim to tell me—that his review will still appear in the Allgemeine Zeitung. You will doubtless have seen that at every opportunity the scoundrelly Blind brings his name before the public as an homme d'état.'

The rotten book business has cost me more than £4 all in all. What a strange fate this LIBRARY has!244

No news from Siebel? His connections certainly seem to be exceedingly limited.

Salut. Your

K. M.

[^1]: Thimm told Petsch a day or two ago that Herr Vogt has been the object of some particularly malicious abuse in Manchester. Brass, expressly for his own personal satisfaction, has ordered new type to be cast so that Herr Vogt can be advertised in an even more conspicuous manner. Given the large number of Swiss in Manchester, is it not possible to sell at least 1 COPY of the Grenzpost there? First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 252, 258. - b ibid., p. 252. - r statesman



