---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "155. Engels to Marx. 6 February "
Page_Range: "293-295"
---

# 155. Engels to Marx. 6 February 



**[p. 154]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 4 February 1861

Dear Moor,

I can't manage more than a line or two today. Provided the tailor is prepared to discount the bill for £35 if I draw it and so arrange it that the money doesn't have to be paid until July or August, VERY WELL, I shall draw it. But I must be able to count on the utmost discretion, for it could cost me my position. If Gumpert has got some money in (I haven't seen him since Friday), I might even be able to arrange it without that.a

Your

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

155

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 6 February 1861

Dear Moor,

You can write and tell Freiligrath that we don't need his tailor. Gumpert has obtained so much money in payment of his accounts that he can lend me the greater part of what is needed, to be repaid monthly £5 AT A TIME; the business has therefore been fixed up. Freiligrath can have the £30 any day and then he need only pay the expenses, which I shall likewise remit to him within 24 hours of my knowing the amount. As far as I'm concerned, he can

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 255, 256-57 and 258.





**[p. 257]**

Your letters returned herewith. Not until my last had gone off,2'2 did I discover that, according to Dana's calculations, you have drawn payment for 19 more articles than they printed. Nevertheless, the fact remains that it is a dirty rotten business and, in this respect, the Tribune is behaving in true PENNY PAPER fashion. Its socialism amounts to nothing more than the highly contempti- ble petty bourgeois mania for getting the best out of a bargain.

Lassalle has become Isidor P-B a again. What sort of politician is this who thinks he has reduced a government to pulp because he has demonstrated that it was guilty of inconsistency in so trifling a matter? He must have some fine notions of parliamentary rule and what stands for law and justice under that rule. The man is incorrigible. One can only wonder what his monumental work in two volumes1' will be about. At all events, anything can happen now that he has made such a complete volte-face in re Vogt.2a As to his little paper,' if I were you, I would advise him to start a weekly in opposition to the Preussisch.es Wochenblatt, Berliner Revue,

Wochenschau des Nationalvereins,'' etc. La Hatzfeldt's 300,000 talers, which both of them will hang on to very tightly indeed, and madame's Lucullan mode of life won't leave enough in the way of an income to keep a daily going. There'd soon be a dearth of cash. On the other hand, a weekly of this description doesn't cost much and it would certainly be a nice source of income for us. Lassalle would, of course, have to pay us properly, i.e., English rates, otherwise it's no go. Besides, the thing would come in very useful as a mouthpiece for us.

Our Prussian corporalc is suffering from a truly colossal attack of the shits. In every speech, the oaf talks of the impending life-and-death struggles.

The Volunteer Journal has published a revised version of my Tribune article on French armaments.2'* This evening I shall, if possible send off a dozen copies to all the newspapers; the thing may create a sensation. I am also sending you one; since the scoundrels in New York are not at all interested in it now, and in any case it has been much shuffled about, no harm can be

[^1]: 11 Prussian Blue - h F. I.assalle, Das System der erworbenen Rechte, Leipzig, 1861. - *•' See this volume, p. 252. - d Wochenschrift des Nationalvereins - '" William I



