---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "156. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 7 February "
Page_Range: "295-296"
---

# 156. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 7 February 

Bücher seems to be behaving quite decently. Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Pri n t ed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 time

156 MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

[London,] 7 February 1861

Dear Freiligrath,

I have so arranged matters with Engels that you can obtain the £30 any day you like, ditto the expenses at 24 hours' notice. The tailleurd

thus becomes redundant, and I would ask you to let Engels know when he is to send the money.1'

I shall myself be obliged to go to Holland, since I won't otherwise be able to weather the current crisis. Would you be so good as to inquire from some business friend of yours what the position is in regard to passports in Holland—whether one has to have a passport? The Tribune's 'turpitude',c coinciding as it did with other misfortunes, was all the more disastrous for me in that it prevented me from making futher arrangements about my wife's convalescence in accordance with doctor's orders. Although I don't belong to the category of 'German martyrs' and have always been inimical to that category, I nevertheless think I have had my fair share of refugee-trouble.

Besides Lassalle's,d I have received offers of journalistic employ- ment from 2 other quarters in Germany. However—and doubtless

[^1]: a tailor - b See this volume, pp. 255, 256-57. - c ibid., pp. 252, 255, 257. - d ibid., p. 252.



