---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "157. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 13 February "
Page_Range: "296-298"
---

# 157. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 13 February 

you share this view—I don't believe the tide has risen high enough for me to agree to anything of the kind just now.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

You can see what a HUMBUG OLD Ruge is by comparing Engels' Reichsverfassungskampagne* in the Revue with the version Arnold has palmed off on you.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Jg. 30, Bd. 2, Ergänzungshefte, No. 12, Stuttgart, 1911-12 (in F. Mehring, 'Freiligrath und Marx in ihrem Brief- wechsel') and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

157

ENGELS TO ELISABETH ENGELS

Manchester, 13 February 1861

Dear Mother,

I am returning herewith the contracts, 7 copies, duly signed, having kept the 8th here.270 I must say that, if it hadn't been for your sake, I could have made up my mind to do so only with difficulty. It was hard for me thus to exclude myself for no valid reason or on no good pretext, or so it seemed to me, from the only family business that remains to us—remains with any certainty. I believe that I also had a right to it and that my brothers b had no right to assume that I should, without more ado and for no reason at all, relinquish that right in their favour. What I demanded was certainly not unfair; moreover, I had put forward that demand quite early enough for it to be taken into account during the deliberations. Emil Blank conceded as much when he was here. But I was told absolutely nothing more, and

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN BARMEN

[^2]: a F. Engels, The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution. - b Hermann, Emil and Rudolf



not till the others had settled everything did they approach me with the demand that I agree to forgo my claim, basing that demand—in Emil V letter—on reasons which may be very businesslike, but which J, for one, would not have cared to bring up in this way vis-à-vis my brothers; and, by way of consolation, / am left with Emil's assurance that Gottfr. Ermen, or so Emil is convinced, will not break his contract with me. This conviction is outweighed by that of our lawyer, who told Emil more than once that the contract qua contract affords me no legal guarantees. They have the business in Engelskirchen, and I have Emil's conviction.

Mother dear, I have swallowed all this and much more for your sake. Not for anything in the world would I contribute in the smallest way towards embittering the evening of your life with family disputes over inheritance. I believe that my conduct when I was at home,141' just like my letters, has amply demonstrated that I was very far from seeking to place obstacles in the way of any agreement and that, on the contrary, I gladly made sacrifices so that everything might be settled in accordance with your wishes. That is why I have signed the thing without more ado. Whatever the cost, I would not wish you to be plagued with such things any longer, or to worry about them. Nor shall I bear any grudge against my brothers, or so much as mention the matter to them, unless they absolutely force me to do so, for it has been settled, and I have no desire to parade my belief that I have made a sacrifice. But I considered it my bounden duty to tell you frankly what my motives were in this matter, and it goes without saying that I never remotely supposed you could, perhaps, have arranged matters more favourably for me. On the contrary, I know that, throughout the negotiations I, too, was always in your thoughts and that you did all you could for me.

The matter is now settled, and that is that. You are unlikely ever to hear another word from me about it, and I need not say that, when Emil comes over here, I shall, as always, give him a fraternal welcome; though our views may have differed in this case, he is, nevertheless, a fine lad, who has always taken my interests over here very much to heart.

The dressing-gown has arrived, and I am very glad of it as it's freezing again, but the red epaulettes are a trifle outré for local taste. By the way, I now have the company of a young ratter, who has strayed into the house.

[^1]: a Emil Engels



