---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "158. Marx to Engels. 14 February "
Page_Range: "298-300"
---

# 158. Marx to Engels. 14 February 



**[p. 261]**

Warmest regards to Hermann, Rudolf, the Blanks and the Boellings.

With much love,

Your son

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Stuttgart and Leipzig, 1921 „ , ,. , , . „ ,. , r B v s Published in English for the first

time

158

MARX TO ENGELS67

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 February 1861 Dear Frederick,

You must really forgive me for not having answered your very kind letter1' before now. In the meantime, you will have received a communication from philistine Freiligrath.

I have had, and still have, an enormous amount of running about to do. For I intend to go to Holland so as to put my affairs over here in order, otherwise they will get out of hand. There are two things I require for the purpose, a passport and money, both of which I shall manage to get hold of here d'une manière on d'une

I haven't written to Lassalle yet. No doubt something in the nature of a weeklyd would be best, but, then again, what a risk we should run, given the indiscretion of our friend, if he were there on the spot as editor-in-chief, and thus in a position to get us all into hot water! He would, of course, immediately stress that the thing was a party organ, so that we, too, should be held responsible for every imbecility and our position in Germany would be ruined before we had so much as regained it. This requires the most careful consideration.

[^1]: autre.1 (I may have to go as far as Aachen.)

[^2]: a Engels is referring to a plot of land by the river Sieg. - b See this volume, pp. 256-58. - c in one way or another - d See this volume, pp. 252, 257.





**[p. 262]**

My wife recommends that you read Hans Ibeles by Johanna Mockel/' in which Willich figures as Wildemann, etc., Mrs von Brüningk as Platonina, and that blackguard Kinkel as Don Juan. I myself know nothing about the rubbish save for what my wife has told me. She says that the book provides irrefutable evidence that Johanna Mockel threw herself out of the window because she had been crossed in love. (BY THE BY, my wife's complexion is still far from smooth and probably won't be for some time to come.) At any rate, it's commendable in Parson Kinkel2'1 that he should make money out of the late Mockel's CONFESSIONS by selling them to Cotta, and then consume it with Minna Werner, by whom he already has a child. Parsons are the cleverest of men. However, Johanna Mockel was an acrimonious body and her breath, for all her love of music, was acrid, too.

Have had the Nazione.h Very good. Ditto the Volunteer Journal. But not your pamphlet.269

Vogt will never forgive Vincke for having put him in the shade so completely. Incidentally, those Prussian swine are making fools of themselves IN EVERY RESPECT. Firstly, the blackguards ask Bonaparte to continue his intervention at Gaeta272; secondly, the rascals have joined Bonaparte and Russia in declaring themselves in favour of continued French intervention in Syria.273 Austria opposes this, and, of course, so does Palmerston, FOR APPEARANCES SAKE. And the way they're carrying on at home! The rotten bunch is bound to come a cropper.

Wilhelm Liebknecht has been almost completely laid off by his American newspapers as well. One of the papers' for which he wrote was SACKED in New Orleans.

Salut. Your

[^1]: K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: a Johanna Mockel, Hans Ibeles in London, Stuttgart, I860. - b See this volume, p. 255. - c Presumably the Deutsche Zeitung



