---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "159. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 15 February "
Page_Range: "300-301"
---

# 159. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 15 February 



**[p. 159]**

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

[London,] 15 February 1861

Dear Lassalle,

I did not, as I had intended, send off a second letter to you on the heels of my first," because, in the meantime, a crisis had supervened, i.e., a financial crisis. Dana wrote from New York, saying that it (the Tribune) had dismissed all its European correspondents, retaining nobody save myself, but that 1. the Cyclopaedia?1 was to be temporarily suspended; 2. my contributions were to be suspended for 6 weeks; 3. finally, that in future I was to write one article less per week.

Under these circumstances and in view of the expenditure arising out of my wife's illness, I have got to go to Holland and see my uncle Philips, if I am to put my financial affairs in some sort of order. Since I require money for the trip I have drawn a bill on you for £20 (ABOUT 34 talers) payable at 6 weeks' sight. I shall send you the required sum from Holland before the expiry date or else bring it to Berlin in person, for I may possibly come as far. I shall come, by the by, simply as a traveller if, that is, I cross the Dutch border and enter Germany. (If I were Karl Heinzen — Heineke the lusty knave274 — I should say OVERSTRIDE.)

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 251. b New American Cyclopaedia



