---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "161. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 27 February "
Page_Range: "303-304"
---

# 161. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 27 February 

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, „ , ,. , , . „ .. , . . „ r Stutteart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

161

ENGELS TO ELISABETH ENGELS

IN BARMEN

Manchester, 27 February 1861

Dear Mother,

I would have liked to answer your dear letter straight away, but with Emil's" being here, have been so taken up with current business that it has been quite impossible. Well, he left yesterday morning and will probably reach Engelskirchen tonight. Dear mother, you have no need to worry about the possibility of my bearing any grudge against my brothers'5 over the matter of the firm; it wouldn't occur to me. It was extremely disagreeable for me to have to withdraw from the family business in this way, nor could I find it agreeable when something I looked upon as a right to which I was entitled was lightly passed over for all kinds of reasons that had no bearing whatever on that right, my assent being, so to speak, demanded as a matter of course.c I do not suggest that things haven't been arranged as well as, if not better than, they might have been had my claim been taken into consideration, but this is precisely what no one has taken the trouble to explain to me, and you cannot deny that, in the circumstances, it was expecting rather much of me to sign the thing. But having done so, I regard it as settled and you can count on me not to bear any of my brothers the slightest grudge about that. We shall need one another often enough and, besides, you know that I'm not in the least inclined to play the noble soul of whom no one takes note. I am sure Emil didn't notice any

[^1]: a Emil Engels - b Hermann, Emil and Rudolf - c See this volume, p. 260.



