---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "162. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 7 March "
Page_Range: "304-306"
---

# 162. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 7 March 



**[p. 267]**

ill-temper on my part, still less any manifestation of annoyance towards himself, nor indeed could he have done, since I have now resigned myself to the thing and my only wish is that the business in Engelskirchen should yield good results for the four of us.

So, do not grieve over it, mother dear. For myself, the thing is over and done with, so much so that even the painful sensation I undeniably experienced, when I signed it, is likewise over and done with, disposed of and forgotten. If, I thought, this one aspect of the thing is disagreeable to me, then how many more such moments—far more disagreeable ones—must you have gone through in the course of the negotiations? And then I rejoiced at being able to put a stop to it all with one stroke of the pen. I might acquire a hundred other businesses, but never a second mother.

I am very well, by the way. Emil enjoyed himself here very much, and will have written to tell you that we have just about finished with Gottfr.,a so that that affair, too, will at last be in order. Well, goodbye, and mind you keep fit and look after yourself properly. My warmest regards to Hermann,b the Rudolfs,' the Blanks, and the Boellings.

With much love,

Your son

Friedrich

162

7 March 1861 Zalt-Bommel, Holland (c/o L. Philips)

Dear Lassalle,

As I've already written and told you,d I intend to proceed from here to Berlin in order to discuss with you personally the

[^1]: First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Stuttgart and Leipzig, 1921 „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , , , .. 1 6 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE67

[^3]: IN BERLIN

[^4]: 11 Gottfried Ermen - b Hermann Engels - c Rudolf Engels and family - d See this volume, p. 263.



Now, however, I should like you to tell me exactly how matters stand as regards the following point. The only passport I have is an old one issued by the French when I was expelled in 1849.279 I could not bring myself to approach the Prussian Embassy in London. Nor did I wish to become a naturalised Englishman (like Freiligrath, Bucher, Zimmermann, etc.) and travel on an English passport. The following question arises: In 1845, when pursued in Belgium by the Prussian. government,28" I obtained through my brother-in-lawa a Prussian expatriation permit. On the pretext of my having ceased to be a Prussian subject, I was, as you know, expelled by the Prussian government in 1849. However, in the eyes of the law, all refugees who had spent 10 years outside the country would equally have ceased to be Prussian 'subjects'. I have never been naturalised abroad. Further, in accordance with the resolution passed by the Preliminary Parliament281 of 1848—a resolution that was regarded as virtually binding by all German governments on the occasion of the elections to the Frankfurt parliament22—all refugees, even though, like Vogt, etc., they might have been naturalised abroad, could avail themselves of their German citizenship and everywhere qualify for election to parliament. I invoked this when, in 1848, I requested that my Prussian citizenship be reinstated. This was refused by the Prussian ministry of the day, though they didn't venture to treat me as a foreigner until ail was up with the revolution.

ïn practice, the only importance that attaches to this question just now is vhether I shall be able to get to Berlin unimpeded. If only I car, succeed in crossing the border, I shall have nothing to fear in Berlin; on the periphery, however, it's a more ticklish matter.

As you know, I am here with my uncle1' (who looks after my mother's affairs and has, in the past, frequently made me substantial advances against my share of the inheritance) in order to put my parlous finances in order. He's a stubborn man, but the fact of nry being a writer greatly appeals to his vanity. So, when you write to me, you must refer to the success (lucus a non lucendoc)

[^1]: •' Wilhelm Robert Schmalhausen - h Lion Philips - ' Literally: 'a grove from not being light'. The expression, first used by Quintilian in De institutione oratoriu (I, 6, 34), illustrates the practice ascribed to ancient Roman etymologists of deriving words from their semantic opposites, as hints ('grove') from Ulcere ('to shine, be light'), because a grove is not light.



