---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "163. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 24 March "
Page_Range: "306-309"
---

# 163. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 24 March 

With kindest regards to you and the countess.b

Your

K. Marx

(Zalt-Bommel is near Nymwegen. I don't imagine that the name is familiar to you. However, it attracted some attention as a result of the recent floods.)

The conspiration de silence, with which the entire German press has greeted my last piece,c precisely as it did the previous ones, I really find most flattering, however detrimental it may be to sales. I trust your health has improved.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published m English m full for the first time

163

MARX TO ANTOINETTE PHILIPS

Berlin, 24 March 1861 13 Bellevuestrasse (Address: Dr F. Lassalle)

My dear Cousin,

I cannot thank you enough for your precious letter which fails only in being too short, although you have acted up to the English rule of packing the best things in the smallest compass.

I arrived at Berlin on Sunday last (17th Marchd), at 7 o'clock in the morning. My travel was not marked by any incident save a 6 V2 hours' delay at Oberhausen, an abominably tedious little place. Lassalle who lives in a very fine house, situated in one of the finest

[^1]: IN ZALT-BOMMEL

[^2]: a You take the point, my friend. - b Sophie von Hatzfeldt - c Herr Vogt - d In the original: 18 March.



On Monday, my friend Lassalle drew up for me a petition to the chief of the Prussian police for my restoration to the civil rights of a Prussian subject.b On Tuesday, Lassalle himself, who is a man of extraordinary audacity, carried the petition to Herr von Zedlitz (Polizeipräsident, partisan of the Junkerpartei and the king's" confidant) and, what with menaces, what with flatteries—Zedlitz considering this direct appeal to himself, instead of to the subaltern authorities, as a compliment paid to his person—he has so far succeeded that to-day the ministerial paper—Die Preussische Zeitung—announces my return to the 'fatherland'. Still I have not yet received an official answer in regard to my re-naturalisation.

On Tuesday evening Lassalle and the countess led me to a Berlin theatre where a Berlin comedy, full of Prussian self- glorification, was enacted.'1 It was altogether a disgusting affair. On Wednesday evening I was forced by them to assist at the performance of a ballet in the Opernhouse. We had a box for

[^1]: a clever women - b See present edition, Vol. 19, p. 339. - c William I - cl See this volume, p. 288.





**[p. 271]**

ourselves at the side—horribile dictw'—of the king's 'loge'. Such a ballet is characteristic of Berlin. It forms not, as at Paris, or at London, an entrejeu,h or the conclusion, of an opera, but it absorbs the whole evening, is divided into several acts, etc. Not a syllable is spoken by the actors, but everything is hinted at by mimickry. It is in fact deadly—dull. The scenery, however, was beautiful; you assisted for instance at a sea-voyage from Livorno to Naples; sea, mountains, seacoast, towns, etc., everything being represented with photographical truth.

On Thursday Lassalle gave a dinner in honour of my return, gentlemen and ladies being invited. Among the celebrities there were the old general von Pfuel, 'Schlachtenmahler" Bleibtreu, Hofrath Förster (a known Prussian historiograph and formerly called the 'Hofdemagog','1 he being a personal friend of the late king') and so forth. Hofrath Förster brought out a toast on my humble self. I was seated at table between the countess and Fräulein Ludmilla Assing, the niece of Varnhagen von Ense and the editor of Varnhagen's correspondence with Humboldt.1 This Fräulein, who really swamped me with her benevolence, is the most ugly creature I ever saw in my life, a nastily Jewish physiognomy, a sharply protruding thin nose, eternally smiling and grinning, always speaking poetical prose, constantly trying to say something extraordinary, playing at false enthusiasm, and spitting at her auditory during the trances of her ecstasis. I shall to-day be forced to pay a visit to that little monster which I treated with the utmost reserve and coldness, giving her to understand by friend Lassalle that the power of attraction works upon myself always in a centrifugal direction and that, when I happen to admire a person very much, I am very apt to steal altogether out of its presence.

The state of things here is illboding for the powers that be. The Prussian Exchequer labours under a deficit, and all the old parties are in a movement of dissolution. The chamber of deputies will have to be re-elected during this season, and there is every probability that, during the process of its reconstitution, a great movement will pervade the country. This may, as my friend Lassalle thinks, be the proper moment for starting a newspaperg

here in the Prussian capital, but I have not yet come to a firm

[^1]: ;l horrible to say - h interlude - l war artist - cl court demagogue - e Frederick William IV - f Briefe von Alexander von Humboldt an Varnhagen von Ense aus den fahren

[^2]: 1827 bis 1858, Leipzig, 1860. - K See this volume, pp. 252, 257, 261.



