---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "165. Marx to Carl Siebel. 2 April "
Page_Range: "310-311"
---

# 165. Marx to Carl Siebel. 2 April 



**[p. 273]**

So, I had to look round for other resources. Party friends here had already proposed to me starting a newspaper3 in the autumn. Hence my presence here. More in my next.

In the meantime, I have run into financial difficulties here (I shan't be staying much longer). If you could lend me 100-150 talers, you would oblige me.

Before returning to England I intend to see you at all events, if only on account of the newspaper project (for which 20,000 talers are READY). So, you must write and tell me, at all events, at which inn in Elberfeld I might best put up for 24 hours.

Your

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

165

MARX TO CARL SIEBEL

[Berlin,] 2 April 1861

Dear Siebel,

A letter, which arrived from Amsterdam today, brought the pleasant tidings that I shall be able to SETTLE my chief financial difficulties (which run to hundreds of pounds), since my uncle'1

(who looks after my mother's affairs) has declared himself agreeable so far as the main issue is concerned. I am thus rid of my chief worry, but as regards the secondary matter I wrote to you about,1 I shall have to rely on you.

I am bored stiff here. I am treated as a kind of LION and am forced to see a great many professional 'wits', both male and female. C'est affreux.'1 What is keeping me here (not for more than another week, I hope) is the circumstance that I refuse to leave until I have forced the Prussian government to recognise my REINIEGRA- ITON. (Prima facie,1' they are not making any difficulties about it, but are trying to shelve it.)

[^1]: IN BARMEN

[^2]: •' See this volume, pp. 252, 257, 261, 271-72. - b Lion Philips - l See previous letter. - d It's awful. - c On the face of it.



