---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "166. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 13 April "
Page_Range: "311-313"
---

# 166. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 13 April 

I shall be spending only one day in Elberfeld. Kindly write and tell me by return, how quickly one can get from Elberfeld to Aachen where I have an appointment.

For Part II of my political economy,8 I have dismissed Duncker in favour of Brockhaus. (Not that the latter knows this yet, but I have a sure means of forcing his hand.)

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English lor the iirst time

166

MARX TO ANTOINETTE PHILIPS

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

Elberfeld, 13 April 1861

To Miss Nanette

My sweet little Cousin,

although you were cruel enough to leave your admirer without one single word of acknowledgement. Now, my cruel little witch, how will you be able to defend such a line of conduct? Were you not aware that a world of Philisteans hemmed me in, and that half an army of antiquated beauties and detestable blue stockings, did their best to transform me into an ass? Old Circe, as you are aware, metamorphosed the companions of Ulysses into pigs.These modern Circes have so far civilised themselves as to take to the asinine line. And was it not your duty, under such circumstances, to come to my rescue? Beware that I take my revenge, and conspire with Waradje'2Si against the tranquillity of your heart.

'Art's Vaterland, das theure schliess' dich an'b is a very fine sentence, but, quite confidentially, I may tell you that Germany is

[^1]: I hope you have received the letter I sent you from Berlin3

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 269-72. - b 'Join the dear Fatherland' (F. Schiller, Wilhelm Tell, Act II, Scene 1).



At Berlin everybody who has some spirit to lose, is of course extremely anxious for fellow sufferers. If the ennui, that reigns supreme at that place, be distributed among a greater lot of persons, the single individual may flatter itself to catch a lesser portion of it. For this reason the countess Hatzfeldt, Lassalle's Egeria, tried everything to prolong my sojourn in the metropolis of tschakose without heads. Yesterday she made her last effort, and we had the following scurrilous conversation:

She. 'This, then, is the thank for the friendship we have shown you, that you leave Berlin so soon as your business will permit?'

I. 'Quite the contrary. I have prolonged my stay at this place beyond the due term, because your amiability chained me to this Sahara.'

She. 'Then I shall become still more amiable.' J. 'Then there remains no refuge for me but running away. Otherwise I should never be able to return to London whither my duty calls me.'

She. 'This is a very fine compliment to tell a lady, her amiability is such as to drive you away!'

/. 'You are not Berlin. If you want to prove me the sincerity of your amiability, do run away with myself.'

She. 'But I fear you will abandon me at the first station.' I. 'I am quite sure of not "leaving the girl behind me" f at the next station. You know that when Theseus, having eloped with the Greek beauty/ abandoned her at some station or other, there at once the god Bacchus descended from the Olymp and carried the forlorne one in his arms to the abode of eternal pleasures. Now, I do not doubt but a god is already waiting for you at the first railway station behind Berlin, and I would be the most cruel of mortals to frustrate you of such a rendezvous.'

But enough of these fooleries. In true real earnest, I feel most happy in the idea of soon seeing again yourself and the whole Bommel family circle. Recommend myself to your 'rival',h and tell

[^1]: a awful - b Allusion to the sandy soil of Brandenburg province, in whose central part Berlin is situated. - c education - d its awfully witty people - e shakos - f Pa- raphrased refrain of an old Irish song: 'The girl I left behind me. - K Ariadne - h Henriette Sophia van Anrooij



