---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "169. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 8 May "
Page_Range: "320-322"
---

# 169. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 8 May 



**[p. 169]**

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE67

IN BERLIN

London, 8 May 1861 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lazarus,

Post tot discrimina rerum." If anyone is responsible for my silence—during my travels, that is, for here in London I had to spend my first week playing Amphitryon13 to my cousin from Rotterdamc—it is the countess/ She had promised that I would find her portrait and a letter from her at Zalt-Bommel. Since neither of these materialised, and since I am a strict observer of the jus vindictae* I didn't write either. In addition, my time at Bommel was completely taken up. On the one hand, I had business with my uncle,' and on the other, I had to pay court to my cousin.8 So, YOU SEE, SIR, WRITING WAS OUT OF THE QUESTION. My stay in Trier was useful in as much as my mother destroyed some old I.O.U.s. Incidentally the old woman also intrigued me by her exceedingly subtle esprit and unshakable equanimity.

First, then, to the financial side. Herewith an interim payment of £20. You still have £10 to come. The concatenation of circumstances was as follows: My uncle gave me £150 in cash to pay bills due at the beginning of May. He promised to send a further bill to London a few weeks later. In the meantime, therefore, I borrowed the enclosed £20 from my cousin,r ditto some money for the household, and a third amount for the repayment of various small loans in Germany. If, however, you must have the outstanding £10 straight away, let me know at once.

I couldn't go to Manchester as I had originally planned h because my cousin from Rotterdam ' decided to travel to London hard on my heels. The pretext was his interest in discussing politics with me. IN FACE, however, I believe he wanted to make the acquaintance of his various female cousins. I wrote to Engels the day before yesterday about the plans for the newspaper' and shall

[^1]: a After so many vicissitudes (Virgil, Aeneid, I). - b playing the host - ' Jacques Philips - d Sophie von Hatzfeldt - e law of retaliation - f Lion Philips - « Antoinette Philips - h See this volume, p. 279. - ' See this volume, p. 281.

[^2]: 11—558



Apropos. Blanqui is still in Mazas prison293 (Paris) where he is being physically maltreated by the gendarmes, etc., on the instructions of the examining magistrate. Taking advantage of the general amnesty, he had travelled from here to Paris—with no plans for conspiracy whatever—as an agent for a businessman. In England, as elsewhere in Europe, the scoundrelly press TRIES TO BURKE THE WHOLE AFFAIR. I have made an appointment for next Saturday with Simon Bernard, who knows more about the matter,294 and we shall then discuss the subject thoroughly. We intend, possibly in concert with Ernest Jones, to hold a PUBLIC MEETING about this outrage. As soon as I have spoken to Bernard and am better informed I shall send a report to the countess. But I would ask you to see to it at once through one channel or another that an item about this guet-apens* appears in the Breslau papers. The German papers reprint one another's stuff, as you know.

To turn from tragedy to tragi-comedy, did you see in the newspapers that workers in Geneva boxed Fazy's ears in broad daylight?

Kossuth's behaviour here during the lawsuit295 was lamentable. Having at first taken the floor with such swagger in his AFFIDAVITS, etc., he bowed and scraped during the hearing itself, assumed as insignificant and subdued an air as possible, disavowed all revolutionary designs or intentions on his own part and thus stupidly deprived himself of the sympathies of a public predis- posed in favour of such melodramatic characters.

I don't know whether you have followed the parliamentary debates on the Mac Donald CASE.296 Palmerston's provocative be- haviour towards Prussia11 has, in fact, no other aim than to explode the idea (Schleinitz's) of an Anglo-Prussian alliance. I need hardly tell you to what purpose, for you know the story.

Toby Meyen, in a Berlin letter to the Hamburg Freischütz, has produced very curious explanations of my stay in Berlin.0 D'abord,6

[^1]: a trap - b Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on 26 April 1861, The Times, No. 23918, 27 April 1861. - c 'Berliner Briefe', Freischütz, No. 49, 23 April 1861. - d First



