---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "170. Marx to Engels. 10 May "
Page_Range: "322-327"
---

# 170. Marx to Engels. 10 May 



**[p. I]**

Rodbertus's pamphleta is highly commendable as regards its tendency. Otherwise, what is good in it isn't new and what is new in it isn't good. Roscherb on the other hand is the true representative of professorial erudition. Fausse science," as Fourier would say.

Don't forget to knock at Brockhaus's doord; 10-20 sheets, for I can never estimate the length in advance.

And now, mon cher, I must conclude by most cordially thanking you for the kind and amiable way in which you took me in and entertained me and, more especially, put up with my incivilities. As you know, I was beset by worries and am also troubled with my liver. But the chief thing is that we laughed together a great deal. Simia non ridetf and thus we have shown ourselves to be truly consummate Buddhas.

I enclose two small photographs, one for the countess, to whom I would ask you to convey my best respects, and one for yourself.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[London,] 10 May 1861 Dear Frederick,

Herewith d'abord1 a photograph. Lupus and Gumpert shall each have ditto as soon as I have got some more prints. I had the thing

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachge- Printed according to the original lassene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published m English m full for the first time

[^2]: 170 MARX TO ENGELS67

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a [J. K.] Rodbertus, Sociale Briefe an von Kirchmann. Dritter Brief, Berlin, 1851. - b W. Roscher, System der Volkswirtschaft. Band I: Die Grundlagen der Nationalökonomie, Stuttgart and Augsburg, 1858. - c False knowledge - d See this volume, p. 274. - e A monkey doesn't laugh. - f first

[^5]: 11*





**[p. 286]**

What you say about the plan for a newspaper in Berlin corresponds precisely to my own view and I had already, mutatis mutandis,c intimated the main points to Lazarus.d And—though I had already told him positively in Berlin that I would undertake nothing of the kind without you and Lupus—I had, nevertheless, positively pledged myself to lay the matter before you 'seriously and objectively', and thus salvavi animam meam.e

Apropos Lassalle-Lazarus. In his magnum opus on Egypt,' Lepsius proved that the exodus of the Jews from Egypt was nothing other than the story Manetho relates of the expulsion from Egypt of 'the leper folk', with an Egyptian priest named Moses at their head. Lazarus the leper is thus the archetype of the Jew and of Lazarus-Lassalle. Save that in our Lazarus's case, leprosy has gone to the brain. Originally, his disease was secondary syphilis that wasn't properly cured. As a result, he developed caries in one of his legs, and something of this still remains, according to his doctor, Frerichg (I don't know how that famous professor spells it), in the form of neuralgia or SOMETHING OF THE SORT in one of his legs. To the detriment of his own physique, our Lazarus is now living as luxuriously as his counterpart, the rich man,h and it is this, I think, that is mainly preventing his recovery. He has acquired altogether too much refinement and would, for instance, regard going into a pub as an outrage. Curiously enough, he asked me at least four times whom I meant by Jacob Wiesenriesler' in Vogt. However, considering his vanity, which has now grown truly 'objective', this was only usus naturae) We are all to be sent his new legal masterpiece (Dharma).298

While in Berlin I also went to see Friedrich Koppen. I found him still very much as he always was. Only he's grown stouter, and 'grizzled'. I went out on the spree with him twice and it was a real

[^1]: a Jacques Philips - b 'Mr Dunlop's Motion for a Select Committee on the Affghan Papers', The Free Press, Vol. IX, No. 4, 3 April 1861. - ' with the necessary alterations - d See this volume, pp. 281, 283-84. - e saved my soul. Cf. Ezekiel 3:19, 21. - f R. Lepsius, Denkmäler ans Ägypten und Äthiopien, Bd. I-XII, Berlin, 1849-59. - s Friedrich Theodor von Freuichs - h See Luke 16 : 19-31. - ' Marx is referring to Lassalle. - i in accordance with his nature.





**[p. 287]**



[^1]: a C. F. Koeppen, Die Religion des Buddha und ihre Entstehung, Bd. 1-2, Berlin,

[^2]: 1857-59. - •> Bernhard Wolff - c partners - d factotum - e in one way or another





**[p. 288]**

Kreuz-Zeitung? Such is the escroquerieh that has enabled Jew Wolff and divinity student Zabel to become leading dignitaries of liberalismus vulgaris, with 'surplus money' at their disposal. A pity I hadn't heard this tale before!

Rutenberg has been handed over by Manteuffel to Schwerin as an expressly guaranteed item of stock-in-trade. With his scissors he is now snipping the Staatszeitung to rights—a paper nobody reads any more. A type of London Gazette. Bruno,c who is said to have fared hellish badly, vainly offered his services to the present ministry—i.e., in the form of continued contributions to the semi-official Preussische Zeitung. He is now the principal con- tributor to Wagener's (Kreuz-Zeitung) Staatslexikon. Besides, he's a FARMER at Rixdorf, or whatever the miserable hole is called.

One day, I witnessed a session of the second chamber from the press gallery. I had similarly witnessed a session of the Prussian Agreers301 in the summer of 1848. Quantum mutatum ab illis!d Not that they were Titans either—far from it! A cramped assembly room. Nothing much in the way of visitors' galleries. The fellows sit on benches (as compared with the arm-chairs of the 'Gentle- men'),302 an odd combination of government office and school- room. A Belgian Chamber is imposing by comparison. Simson or Samson, or whatever the president's name is, avenges himself— with all the grotesque and brutal magisteriality of a ministerial huissier"303—for the kicks dealt him by Manteuffel when dispens- ing discipline with his ass's jawbones among the philistines cowering below. In any other assembly this unspeakable SPECIES of servile insolence personified would already have had his ears boxed. In Berlin one is repelled, especially at the theatre, by the prevalence of uniforms (apropos, in the very first few days, la Hatzfeldt took me to a box close to that of 'handsome William' and company, in order to insult the royal family. Three hours of ballet. This was the only performance of the evening. Yet another aspect of Berlin), yet one cannot but rejoice when one espies, here and there among the crowd of kow-towing bureaucratic school- boys, some chap in uniform who at least holds his head erect and sits up straight. Vincke happened_ to be speaking—indeed, he never lets a session go by without doing so. I had, in fact, flattered

[^1]: a Neue Preußische Zeitung - b piece of swindling - c Bruno Bauer - d How much they have changed! (Virgil, Aeneid, ii, paraphrased.) - e doorkeeper



Went to see Siebel in Elberfeld. Had supper with him in Barmen. Pretty, young wife, sings well, admires her Carl—found her not unpleasing. Siebel just the same as ever. Consorts mainly with a liberal journalist (formerly Münster correspondent to the

Neue Rheinische Zeitung)," poets, musicians, and painters. The best among them, I thought, was Seel. Siebel took me to the 'California' in Barmen, a boring bunch. They drank my health. I got Siebel to tell them I had lost my voice, and he replied on my behalf with a few boring jokes which, however, were in the RIGHT PLACE. Siebel says that his father copies everything he does— writing verse and drinking, so that he's said to be a block, off the young chip.

In Cologne I called on Schneider II and Dr Klein. Just the same as ever—if anything, have gone even further. Spent a couple of hours tippling with them. In one pub saw, also incognito, Stuhlgang Königswinter (Wolfgang Müller).d Called on Mrs Daniels. Not that ninny and National Association man Bürgers. But more about this later. I've indulged in so much chat that I haven't yet touched on essentials. Some more anon.

K. M.

[^1]: Totus tuuse

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a a vicinity of Berlin - b Moritz von Blanckenburg - c Stierlin - d In the original a pun on the word Stuhlgang (evacuation of the bowels) and the pseudonym of Wilhelm Müller—Wolfgang Müller von Königswinter. - e All yours.



