---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "171. Marx to Engels. 16 May "
Page_Range: "327-328"
---

# 171. Marx to Engels. 16 May 



**[p. 171]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 16 May 1861

DEAR Frederick,

I missed Gumpert. First, I went to Euston Square 3 0 5 at 5 in the afternoon and waited there till 6. Later on, at ABOUT 8 OCLOCK, I went to London Bridge Station. In neither case did I catch him.

Perhaps you would be so kind as to write and tell us when you are coming. 3

As regards your own relations with Prussia,13 let me begin by giving you the opinion of the leading jurists with whom I spoke in Berlin. Everything depends upon whether or not you were conscripted. If not, your CASE as a Landwehr41 man is one for the ordinary civil courts. It would seem, by the by, that the Prussians are officially concerned only with your Elberfeld affair, not the one in Baden.306

I don't know if you have read the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung of 19 April last. T h e final news item from Paris c reads (I quote):

I had intended to give you a further account of my journey today, but Mr Bühring has just come to see me, so I must get this note off.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: 'By way of a warning to booksellers, Herr Vogt by Karl Marx has been placed on the list of proscribed books, thus frustrating the appearance of a much abridged French version, which is now in press.'

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgi3 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 279, 291. - b ibid., p. 15. - c 'Paris, 17. April', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 109, 19 April 1861.



