---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "173. Marx to Engels. 10 June ; "
Page_Range: "329-330"
---

# 173. Marx to Engels. 10 June ; 

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachge- Printed according to the original lassene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, , . . Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published in English in full for the first time

173

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 June 1861

Dear Frederic,

I have had a letter from Vienna today. To start with, Friedländerb wants me to send him 2 articles, 1 about the business in America (in which I am to provide a brief political and military résumé of the whole mess, for 1 or 2 leaders) and 1 on the situation in England. Later (i.e. when he has had these articles) he will let me have his further suggestions; and, in fact, I am to get £1 for each article, 10/- for mere news-letters. This is good pay by German standards and I shall have to agree to the thing, car il faut vivre.c Since I should like to get the 2 sample articles off this week, you must do^the military part about America for me.d I will then fit it into the political part.

A week ago I made a serious start on my book.31" Have heard nothing more of Lassalle, save • what his cousin Friedländere

(Lassalle does not and must not know anything about the transactions with the Presse) wrote and told me from Berlin, namely:

[^1]: 'Since his return from Breslau,' F. Lassalle has been partly busying himself with the affair of your naturalisation, whose satisfactory outcome I believe he prejudices

[^2]: a Thucydides, De bello peloponnesiaco. - b Max Friedländer - c for one's got to live - d See this volume, pp. 294-96. - e Julius Fricdländer - l Polish name: Wroclaw



