---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "174. Mar x to Ferdinand Lassalle. 11 June "
Page_Range: "330-331"
---

# 174. Mar x to Ferdinand Lassalle. 11 June 

by his excessive zeal and his memoranda tending to prove too much, and partly spending his time perusing and reading out loud the numerous letters that pour in from professors and privy councillors thanking him for a book so fine, so interesting and so witty, etc.2 These letters provide him with a grand opportunity to make conversation about his "excellent" book, thus proving that he is quite insensible to little titillations of this kind and wholly immune to vanity. The poor countess,b who is fighting off a severe attack of influenza, finds it ever more difficult to play her official role of opposer, and I, too, am beginning to tire of acting as seconder.'

So much for Friedländer. As regards the goings-on in. the so-called National Association257

down here and Kinkel's consequent downfall, I shall write tomorrow, having still to write to Berlin and Vienna today.

Salut. Regards to Lupus. CAVOURS DEATH! Qu'en pensez-vous?c Garibaldi, the jackass, has made a fool of himself by a solidarity letter311 to the Yankees.312

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

174

[London,] 11 June 1861

Dear Lassalle,

Many thanks for your book," which arrived here a day or two since (I immediately sent the other copies to their respective destinations in Manchester). I began at the end, namely with the Pelasgian affair, and then went back to the law of succession at the beginning, having now progressed as far as p. 215. It is an important work in every respect. However, I cannot send you a criticism, assessment, etc., until I have read right through the

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE67

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: Perhaps you would be so kind as to pass on the enclosed letter to the countess.313

[^4]: a F. Lassalle, Dos System der erworbenen Rechte. - b Sophie von Hatzfeldt - ' What do you think about it?



