---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "175. Engel s to Marx. 12 June "
Page_Range: "331-334"
---

# 175. Engel s to Marx. 12 June 



**[p. 294]**

I have, alas, had a letter from Germany saying tha,t the £10 cannot be remitted to you before the end of this month. Until then, I must trust to your diplomatic finesse. As you know, I was disagreeably surprised by the fact that my uncle,3 who honoured the bills I currently owed, put off giving me the additional amount I asked for until SOME MONTHS LATER. All the same, I couldn't help laughing at such a typically Dutch turn of events.

Whether or not I am accorded Prussian nationality there might still be some question of myself and FAMILY travelling to Berlin on my passport as a 'foreigner', and spending the winter there.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

175

Manchester, 12 June 1861 Dear Moor,

Unfortunately, I haven't been keeping any newspapers on the American war, besides many of the places are not to be found on the map. The essential points are as follows:

The South had been quietly arming for years, particularly since

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachge- Printed according to the original lassene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin 1922 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX314

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a Lion Philips





**[p. 295]**

For the South, just as for the North, the primary objective was Washington. The South's offensive in that direction was far too weak; beyond Richmond the main force was evidently not strong enough to put in a timely thrust. All they managed to do was send a mobile column to Harper's Ferry on the Potomac above Washington. This POSITION is ideally suited to an offensive against the North (Maryland and Pennsylvania), for it lies at the confluence of the Shenandoah, an important river, and the Potomac, is extremely strong tactically and commands both rivers completely. Seemingly, it was not without intent that the Federal Armory was sited up there by a government that foresaw and favoured future secession. The occupation of Harper's Ferry disrupts the control of the Potomac line by Union troops at a sensitive spot and will immediately afford the Southern troops complete command of both banks, assuming they advance en masse to this line.

The fate of Maryland and Delaware was dependent on Washington being held by the North; cut off from the South and occupied by Union troops, they at once fell to the Union. A second success for the North.

Result: Thus, for all its preparations, the South has achieved nothing, save that the North, after only 1 month's preparation, has already wrested from it the national capital and three slave states, while a fourth slave state doesn't dare secede;317 also that the South's offensive on the Potomac has come to a halt, whereas the North has already advanced beyond this river, as yet without meeting resistance. For every man the South can still produce, the North will produce three or four. The seceded states have about 7'/2 million inhabitants, of which more than 3 million are slaves; a minimum of 1 million whites must be deducted to guard the slaves, so that barely 2V2 million are left as the aggregate of the population available for war. If 10% of these are mobilised, probably the largest number ever mobilised for defensive pur- poses, this will produce at most 250,000 men. But there would certainly not be a muster of that order. Switzerland, with pretty well the same population—rather more than 2 millions—has on paper about 160,000 militiamen. By contrast the North — reckoning the free states alone—numbers nearly 20 millions, all of whom are available with the exception, perhaps, of California, Utah and the territories in the far West. If we say the available population amounts to 17 millions and if we assume that not 10% but simply one third of that, i.e. 3Vs%, are available for an offensive war, we arrive at over 500,000 men, more than enough to quell the South, even if it exerts itself to the utmost. Man for man, there is no question that the people from the North are markedly superior to those from the South, both physically and morally. Your pugnacious SOUTHERNER has a good deal of the cowardly assassin in him. Each of them goes about armed, but only because this will enable him, during a quarrel, to fell his antagonist before the latter expects to be attacked. That is the aver

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: a In the original the words 'Virginia and Carolina' were crossed out here. - b In the original: west.



