---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "177. Marx to Engels. 1 July "
Page_Range: "337-340"
---

# 177. Marx to Engels. 1 July 



**[p. 177]**

MARX T O ENGELS 2 4 9

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 July 1861

Dear Frederic,

I was delighted to see Lupus here, as was the whole FAMILY. Despite his gout, the old m a n had quite a youthful air. H e immediately handed over-your letter,232 and £2, which promptly went to the TAX GATHERER. I was expecting to get a SUPPLY from Germany this morning, but nothing has arrived yet. Since I am completely without REVENUE for the time being and yet IN A CONTINUAL COURSE OF CONSUMPTION (this being how some economists account for 'profit', which they see as deriving, not from the costs of production, but from the costs of consumption 3 2 7), any supplies from Manchester would be most welcome.

Please write and tell me at once what you think about the moves (military) in Virginia. T h e BLUNDERS made by officers of the militia—-Brigadier-General Pierce, by nature a 'tailor' from the State of Massachusetts—will, of course, recur often enough on' both sides.328 Is Washington still threatened? Do you believe that the SOUTHERNERS' position at Manassas JUNCTION is an offensive one? O r aren't the fellows engaged rather in a withdrawal? In Missouri the defeat of the SOUTHERNERS seem certain,329 and who should now turn u p there but the terrible 'COLONEL Bernstein'? From a private letter to Weber it transpires that 'COLONEL Willich' is in command of a corps from Cincinnati. H e would not appear to have gone into action yet.

O n studying these American affairs more closely, I have come to the conclusion that the conflict between South and North—for 50 years the latter has been climbing down, making one concession after another—has at last been brought to a head (if we disregard the effrontery of 'CHIVALRY'S' fresh demands) by the weight which the extraordinary development of the NORTH WESTERN STATES has thrown into the scales. T h e population there, with its rich admixture of newly-arrived Germans and Englishmen and, moreover, largely made u p of SELF-WORKING FARMERS, did not, of course, lend itself so readily to intimidation as the GENTLEMEN of Wall Street and the Quakers of Boston. According to the last census (1860), it had grown by 67 p. c. between 1850 and 1860, in



**[p. 301]**

A closer look at the history of the secession movement reveals that secession, constitution (Montgomery), Congress ibid., etc., are USURPATIONS286 without exception. Nowhere did they allow the people en masse to vote. This 'USURPATION'—which is concerned, not only with secession from the North, but also with consolidating and intensifying the oligarchy of the 300,000 SLAVE LORDS in the South vis-à-vis the 5 million WHITES—has been the subject of highly characteristic articles which appeared in the Southern PAPERS at the time.b

And now let us turn to high politics—Kinkel and the National Association in London.0 You will no doubt recall that, a week ago last Saturday, Heintzmann had adjourned the meeting (a fact he advertised in the Hermann4), because Juch had been sent to Coburg, THERE TO MOVE A placitum patrum.c At the same time, the GREAT Heintzmann had convened an extraordinary meeting for Tuesday' to commemorate the Battle of Waterloo,332 etc.

Foxy Gottfried, however, together with Zerffi, sent out secret circulars to their people (see last Hermann) summoning them to a meeting on Saturday.8 Gottfried and his people, having now got the field to themselves, effectively held their meeting behind the backs of the others. Gottfried (as one of the vice-presidents of the National Association) took the chair, and Zerffi (as a member' oi the committee of the self-same National Association) acted as secretary. It goes without saying that the resolutions pertaining tc the Mac Donald business,318 etc., that were adopted at this meeting were agreeable to Gottfried and Zerffi. Now, on the following

[^1]: a Abraham Lincoln - b See this volume, pp. 305-09. - c ibid., pp. 297-98. - d Marx refers to the 'Protokoll der Versammlung der Londoner Mitglieder des National- vereins am 1. Juni 1861', Hermann, No. 128, 15 June 1861. - e senatorial decision - f 18 June - 8 15 June. The details are contained in an editorial on the National Association meeting of 15 June 1861 in the Hermann, No. 130, 29 June 1861.

[^2]: 12*





**[p. 302]**

it would seem, the row was discussed at a meeting of the Natio- nal Association at Seyd's Hotel. But I haven't had a report on it yet.

This will give you some idea of what the 'Machiavellismus Gottofredi Magni"7 is like. You will further see from the last Hermann's account of the meeting of the National Associationd

that Blind—who has as many little dodges up his sleeve as there are fleas on a dog—invited 'Dralle'e to join, in order to secure for himself a vote of thanks as the saviour of Schleswig-Holstein/ This was, however, CAPPED BY Heintzmann, who didn't even give Dralle's NOTION a chance to be put to the vote. This same summusg Blind got a third party to ask Weber, etc., whether he should 'appear as a speaker' at the MEETING to be held by the German commu- nist association and the Frenchmen's associations in honour of the June insurrection.333 Reply: If he wanted a drubbing— yes.

Ad vocemh Lassalle's work: ' Lupus has made me a present of his copy, for disposal as follows: to be sent by you to my cousin, addressed to: 'A. Philips, Advokaat,' Keizergracht bij de Westermarkt. L. L. 267, Amsterdam'

You must, of course, erase Lassalle's dedication to Lupus. My cousin is interested in the theory of jurisprudence.

[^1]: a 'no go' - b 29 June - c 'Machiavellianism of the great Gottfried' - d 'Protokoll der außerordentlichen Sitzung der Londoner Mitglieder des Deutschen Nationalvereins, abgehalten den 18. Juni 1861, in Seyd's Hotel, 39, Finsbury Sqre', Hermann, No. 130, 29 June 1861. - e A pun on the name Dralle which also means 'buxom'. - f See this volume, p. 264.- K sublime - h As to - ' F. Lassalle, Das System der erworbenen Rechte. - i Barrister



