---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "178. Engels to Marx. 3 July "
Page_Range: "340-342"
---

# 178. Engels to Marx. 3 July 

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in Enghsh in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f i r s t t l m e

178

ENGELS TO MARX249

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 3 July 1861

Dear Moor,

Your questions about the state of affairs in Virginia are easier put than answered. Is Washington still threatened? Not im- mediately, otherwise the SOUTHERNERS would not have eyacuated so much territory; but one doesn't know, of course, how the opposing sides compare in terms of strength. Should the first major attack by the Northerners be decisively repulsed, it's impossible to say what might happen, for there is no knowing where they would come to a halt again. However, the chances are three to one that, even in that case, the Potomac would form an adequate obstacle.

The position at Manassas JUNCTION is determined by the SOUTHERNERS' need to maintain communications with North-West Virginia along the railway to Paris and Strasburg. If M. J. is lost, their nearest railway communication with West Virginia (on the far side of the mountains) would be the line from Richmond via Gordonsville to Staunton—80 miles to the south; they would lose the opportunity of rapidly moving their reserves, particularly those immediately to the rear of their dispositions, from west to east, etc., as need arose, while any elements in West Virginia could be cut off or forced to make a wide detour. Such is the



**[p. 304]**

The affair at Big Bethel328 is of no significance. Tactically speaking, it was abominably MISMANAGED; a night attack carried out with volunteers like these and, what's more, with each column separated from the rest, could only end in confusion, mutual slaughter, and panicky flight.

On the other hand, the North would seem to be at fault in 2 respects: 1. the massive strength of the newly formed and fully mobile corps doesn't appear to have been called on at all; they were kept kicking their heels some 400-500 miles from the scene of the fighting, whereas on the Potomac they would have been worth their weight in gold, and 2. BRAVE OLD Scott would again appear to have made colossal plans for an encirclement334 which can only lead to a colossal dispersal of his troops; to what extent this may lead to defeats, given the slack ways and unknown heroes of the South, it is impossible to determine.

What is this about not voting on secession?" According to all the papers up here, the resolutions at the conventions were ratified in each state by popular vote.

Let me know how il capitano che'l gran Sepolcro libera di Cristo, Goffredo il Magnanimoh subsequently got on in the affair.

Enclosed SL 62585, five pounds, Liverpool, 12 May 1860. I shall see if I can't send you some more towards the end of the week.

Many regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: How did Lupus get on at the Prussian Embassy?335

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , n | . Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 301. - b Gottfried the Magnanimous, who liberated Christ's great sepulchre. Engels ironically likens Gottfried Kinkel to Godfrey of Bouillon, a character in Tasso's Gerusalemme liberata. See this volume, pp. 297-98, 301-02.



