---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "181. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 17 July "
Page_Range: "348-351"
---

# 181. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 17 July 

In the meantime, however, that creature Blind—who, as a 'republican', does not.of course,belong to the National Association- had succeeded by dint of obsequiousness, sharp practice, and intrigues of all kinds in having himself loudly acclaimed as the courageous and patriotic champion of Schleswig-Holstein at both the National Association meetings of 15 and 18 June.3

So much for this war between mice and frogs.b You will have seen that even the Kladderadatsch contained a joke or two at the expense of the noble poet.1

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

181

MARX TO ANTOINETTE PHILIPS

[London,] 17 July 1861

My sweet little Cousin,

I hope you will not have mis-interpreted my long silence. During the first time I did not exactly know where to direct my letters to, whether to Aachen or to Bommel. Then, there came a

[^1]: Published m English for the first time

[^2]: IN ZALT-BOMMEL

[^3]: :1 See this volume, pp. 264-65. - b An allusion to Batrachomyomachia (The Battle of the Frogs and the Mice), a Greek poem which parodies Homer's Iliad, and also to G. Rollenhagen's poem Froschmeuseler, der Frosch und Meuse wunderbare Hofhaltunge. - ' Kinkel. Marx refers to 'Dei deutsche Mann. Ein Spielzeug für Wortklauber', Kladderadatsch, No. 29-30, 30 June 1861.





**[p. 312]**

My Berlin affair has not yet been brought to a definite issue. You will remember that during my stay in the Prussian metropolis the Hohenzollern authorities seemed to yield, and even furnished me with a passport for one year. Yet hardly had I turned my back upon them, when Lassalle, to his utter astonishment, received a letter from the Polizeipräsident v. Zedlitz to the purpose that I could not be 'renaturalised' because of my 'politische Bescholtenheit'.* At the same time the Prussian government declared that all the Political Refugees, having been absent from Prussia for more than 10 years, had lost their right of citizenship, had become foreigners, and would, consequently, like all other foreigners, only be re-naturalised at the pleasure of the king. In other words, they declared their so-called amnesty1' to be a mere delusion, sham and share. This was a point I had tried to drive them to during my Berlin stay, and it was more than even the Prussian press and the Prussian chamber of deputies were able to bear silently with. Consequently, the case gave rise to bitter discussions in the journals, and to an interpellation of the cabinet in the Abgeord- netenhaus.c For the nonce the ministry escaped by means of some equivocous and contradictory statements, but the whole affair contributed not a little to disillusion people in Germany as to the 'new era' inaugurated by what the Berliners irreverently call the 'Schöne Wilhelm'/345 Lassalle, with his usual stubbornness, tried hard to get the better of the authorities. First he rushed to Zedlitz and made him such a scene that the Freiherre got quite frightened and called his secretary for assistance. A few weeks later, Zedlitz having been removed from his post, in consequence of hostile demonstrations against him by the Berlin mob, Lassalle called upon Geheimrath' Winter, the successor of Zedlitz, but the "successor' declared that his hands were bound by the decision of

[^1]: a political unreliability - b See this volume, pp. 248-49. - c Chamber of Deputies - '' 'Handsome William' - e Baron - {. Privy Councillor



At the same time I had the good fortune of being honoured by the singular attention of the French government. A person at Paris whom I do not know, had a translation of my pamphlet Herr Vogt already in print, when an order on the part of M. de Persigny forbade him going on with the translation. At the same time a general warning was communicated to all the booksellers at Paris against selling the German original of Herr Vogt. I got only acquainted with this occurrence by a Paris correspondence published in the Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung."

From the Gräfin Hatzfeldt I have received a letter filling 16 pages.b Take an example of this, my dear child. She has gone—of course, in company of Lassalle—to a bathing place near Frankfurt on the Main. Thence they will proceed to Switzerland, and, after a month's sojourn there, to Italy. She feels much ennuyée1 and thinks herself much to be pitied, because she has no other business on hand save that of amusing herself. It is in fact a bad plight for an active, stirring and rather ambitious woman whose days of flirtation are gone by.

A propos. I have sent from Manchester to Augustd the two volumes of Lassalle's new juridical worke and should like to hear whether the packet has found out its address. From Jacques' I have heard nothing.

I think not, my dear child, that Mrs Marx and her daughters will fina an occasion of paying this year a visit to Bommel, because the Doctor thinks a seabath during the hot season would be the

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 290. - b Sophie von Hatzfeldt's letter to Marx of 14 June 1861 - c bored - d August Philips - e F. Lassalle, Das System der erworbenen Rechte. - 1 Jacques Philips



