---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "182. Marx to Engels. 20 July "
Page_Range: "351-353"
---

# 182. Marx to Engels. 20 July 



**[p. 314]**

I hope, my sweet little charmer, you will not prove too severe, but, like a good Christian, send me very soon one of your little letters without revenging yourself for my too long protracted silence.

Recommend me to your father, to my friend 'Jettchen', the Doctor,b your brother Fritz and the whole family, and believe me always

Your most sincere admirer

Charles Marx

I am quite astonished at the news of the attentat'' on his Prussian Majesty,341' alias 'Der schöne Wilhelm'.'1 How could any person of common understanding risk his own head in order to kill a brainless ass?

First published in International Review of Reproduced from the original Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956

182

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 20 July 1861

Dear Engels,

I do not believe that you can apply to the Prussian Embassy in London for a 'certificate of good conduct'347 without presenting the fellows with a document most compromising to yourself.

Neither under Prussian nor international law is the Prussian Embassy a supervisory body obliged to issue testimonia as to the

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 216. - b Antonie Johannes Wouters van Anrooij - ' attempt - '' 'handsome William'





**[p. 315]**

The same cannot be said of the Prussian consul in Manchester. Consuls are commercial, not political representatives of their state. Hence they are SUPPOSED to know the businessmen of their locality and, in particular, those of their own nationality. Hence the consul would be able to give a certificate to the effect that X. X. has lived in Manchester for 10 years as a respectable businessman and is known to be such. The Prussian government has no right whatever to demand any other kind of testimonial and would be too cautious to do so officially. But the former it can demand, because your request for renaturalisation has put you on the same footing as FOREIGNERS of whom suchlike testimonials, etc., may be required when they apply for naturalisation in Prussia.

The Prussian government has no more right to demand any sort of testimonial concerning your political conduct than, say, a confession of political faith executed by you yourself.

I have heard nothing more either from Viennad or from Dana, although the latter sends me the Tribune every week.

Brockhaus will not definitely make up his minde until I have sent him the manuscript.'"0 This is a far from pleasant condition since he will submit the manuscript to the judgment of his idiots of literary advisers over there. Come to that, I'm not progressing as fast as I should like, owing to much domestic TROUBLE.

Have you read any of Lassalle's book'? Have you sent the book to my cousin8? This last is of importance to me, since I am sorely in need of that youth's bons offices}*

Lassalle and the countess ' are at a spa near Frankfurt am Main.

[^1]: •' by abuse - b institution for police spies - ' under the auspices of - d See this volume, p. 292. - c ibid., pp. 274 and 285. - f F. Lassalle, Das System der erworbenen Rechte. - s August Philips - h good offices - • Sophie von Hatzfeldt

[^2]: 13—558



