---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "185. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 24 September "
Page_Range: "357-358"
---

# 185. Marx to Antoinette Philips. 24 September 



**[p. 185]**

MARX TO ANTOINETTE PHILIPS

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

[London,] 24 September 1861

My sweet little Cousin,

You must excuse me for sending you today only a few lines. The fact is that I reserve to myself the pleasure of addressing you a real letter' in a few days. For the present, I wish only to learn, by your gracious interference, whether August" has at last received Lassalle's work!1 Lassalle bothers me with a new letter as to this subject, he considering of course 'his work' as something awfully important. He presses me to answer him by next post, and thus I must again call upon you. You will much oblige me by informing me as soon as possible of the real state of the case.

Apropos. The book was to be sent to August from Manchester, not from London, but I have been assured that it had been sent from Manchester to Amsterdam. Of course, I don't care a fig for the whole 'loss', if loss there be, since August would certainly not much miss 'the work'. But courtesy obliges me to make these researches.

In writing me, you will be of course so friendly to inform me at the same time of what you are doing arid so forth, knowing my deep interests in all that concerns you.

My best compliments to your father and the whole family. Believe me always your most sincere admirer

K. M.

[^1]: First published in International Review of Reproduced from the original Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956

[^2]: a August Philips - b F. Lassalle, Das System der erworbenen Rechte.



