---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "187. Marx to Engels. 30 October "
Page_Range: "360-362"
---

# 187. Marx to Engels. 30 October 



**[p. 187]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 30 October 1861

Dear Engels,

Circumstances have finally CLEARED to the extent that I have at least got firm ground under my feet again and am no longer in a state of complete suspense. As you know, shortly after my return from Manchester352 and as soon as I thought the moment opportune, I again started writing for the Tribune at weekly intervals. Last week included, I had sent them 6 articles.355 Then, in the last mail, the first 2 articles" actually came back in print, the first of them (over 3 columns on English opinions on the UNITED STATES) in a PROMINENT PLACE and particularly REFERRED TO on the front page of the paper. To this extent, then, the matter is in order and hence I am assured of £2 per week.

Secondly: I had, as you know, already written to the Vienna Presse from Manchester, asking for 'information'.35'1 About 3 weeks ago I got an answer which was politically entirely satisfactory to me. (In the meantime, the paper has modified its attitude to Schmerling.) At the same time, Friedländer (on behalf of Zang, the proprietor) asked for 2 sample articles. Theseb I sent off and yesterday morning I got an answer to the effect 1. that the articles had appeared with due prominence on the front page,357 2. that I was engaged on a regular basis from November, £1 per article, l Osh. per news-letter.

As regards the Tribune, I must first of all find some way of drawing bills, for it can hardly be arranged through Freiligrath in future.

For the rest, this twofold engagement holds out an assured prospect of putting an end to the harried existence led by my family over the past year, and also of finally completing my book.310 Thanks to you, I was able to placate the more pressing of the blackguards at the beginning of September, but even so, the

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'The American Question in England' and 'The British Cotton Trade', New-York Daily Tribune, Nos. 6403 and 6405, 11 and 14 October 1861.- b K. Marx, 'The North American Civil War' and 'The Civil War in the United States', Die Presse, Nos. 293 and 306, 25 October and 7 November 1861.





**[p. 324]**

Borkheim had strangely misled both himself and me over Kolatschek's Stimmen der Zeit. True, No. 39 carried a contribution running to a printer's sheet headlined 'K. Vogt und K. Marx', but it was written by the student Abt, the 'lowest of the low', whom you will remember from Geneva. Having taken due note of the actual content of my pamphletb in the first 2 pages, he devotes the remaining 14 to railing in the most rabid and villainous fashion against me and, notably, Schily and Imandt, on account of the 'Bristlers'.338 He concludes by saying that, if I don't recant, he will attack me 'at the only vulnerable spot he knows' and compromise me in a manner 'that I shall regret'. Needless to say, I didn't take the slightest notice of the scoundrel. But something very odd must have happened to put Mr Kolatschek at Abt's mercy, for, as Abt says, he had had the scrawl as far back as January and had refused to print it until September.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Don't forget to send me as detailed a report as possible on the status quo in Manchester.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, J9J3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Henriette Marx - b Herr Vogt



