---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "188. Mar x to Engels. 6 November "
Page_Range: "362-363"
---

# 188. Mar x to Engels. 6 November 



**[p. 188]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 November 1861 Dear Frederick,

You must excuse me for my failure to send a more prompt acknowledgement of the £ 5 , ditto the wine. Very many thanks for both. It so happened that I have been very busy of late, on top of which I have had a great deal of domestic BOTHER.

Once again, the Tribune's front page calls attention to an article of mine as 'MOST INTERESTING'.2 O d d the way these YANKEES312 hand out testimonia to their own CORRESPONDENTS. I had an answer from my old lady b yesterday. 'Soft' words, BUT NO CASH. She also tells me what I have long known, namely that she is 75 and is suffering from many of the infirmities of old age.

Up till now I have also been vainly trying to raise a LOAN over here. T h e guarantors I was able to produce were not, as I had in any case already suspected, sufficiently respectable. Many chaps have been more fortunate in this line. E. g. that scoundrel Beta got £ 5 0 out of a LOAN society on the guarantee of M r — E d g a r Bauer!

Write soon, for I have an especial need of your letters during what is still a highly critical interlude for me.

[^1]: Russia's goings-on in Poland aren't bad at all. No less nice are the GESTS and EXPLOITS of handsome William.3D9

[^2]: You may perhaps have seen from the German, or also from some of the English newspapers, with what persistent importunity citizen and statesman Blind is 'blossoming' into a German Mazzini.c

[^3]: Apropos. While you were away,3fi0 I received avisd from Holland that Lassalle's books 6 had not been received by my cousin.' Perhaps you would be so good as to make inquiries about it.

[^4]: If you have a moment, could you write me a report on the Armstrong controversy 3 6 1 for the Presse?

[^5]: Salut. Your

[^6]: K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

[^7]: 3 K. Marx, 'The London Times and Lord Palmerston', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6411, 21 October 1861. - b Henriette Marx - c See this volume, p. 264.- fl notification - e F. Lassalle, -Das System der erworbenen Rechte. - ' August Philips



