---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "189. Mar x to Watteau. 10 November "
Page_Range: "363-364"
---

# 189. Mar x to Watteau. 10 November 



**[p. 189]**

MARX TO LOUIS WATTEAU362

IN BRUSSELS

[London,] 10 November 1861

Dear Citizen,

My reply to your last letters has been delayed for so long because I was waiting from day to day for news from a lady you know.a At last I have learned that she left for Italy some months ago but will shortly be returning to Berlin.

If the first letter for L.b has not arrived, I imagine that the fault must lie in the address; it was marked via Gibraltar instead of via Southampton. After I had been advised of this mistake, I corrected the address on the second letter. This I not only franked but also registered. I enclose the receipt from the English post office.

The 50 francs I am sending you comes from a German working men's club.c In my next letter I shall send you a further contribution. Please be so kind as to acknowledge receipt and send copies of your pamphlet363 in return.

It would be useful if you were to write me a letter I could send to Berlin and which would establish the monetary resources needed for a <rescue attempt>.d I should return it to the appropriate quarter.

Rest assured that there is no one more interested than myself in the lot of a mane whom I have always regarded as the brains and inspiration of the proletarian party in France.

Salut.

K. M.

[^1]: First published in full in La Nouvelle revue Printed according to the original socialiste. Politique. Culture, No. 20, Paris, jqyg Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Sophie von Hatzfeldt - b Cyrill Lacambre - ' the German Workers' Educational Society in London - d The words in brackets are crossed out in the original. - e Auguste Blanqui



