---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "190. Mar x to Engels. 18 November "
Page_Range: "364-365"
---

# 190. Mar x to Engels. 18 November 



**[p. 190]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 November [1861]

Dear Engels,

herum Crispinus!* Well, this is how matters now stand. On 9 November, I drew £16 on the Tribune for the 8 articles then sent. Out of this £16, I paid £3 apiece on account to butcher, baker, TEAGROCER, OILMAN, MILKMAN, and GREENGROCER. I spent 10/- on coal, which will all be gone by tomorrow. Your £5 went for the most part on the repayment of small cash loans. So, I'm broke, and there are further debts to be paid—the LANDLORD, school fees, the cobbler, and essential purchases for the family against the winter. I write for the Presse almost every day. With the Presse and the Tribune combined I might be able to make SHIFT. But in view of the constantly reaccumulating deficit (not a. milliard, admitted- ly364) and a whole year's loss of income this really can't be done.

Now there has been yet another disaster. As you know, I advanced Petsch & Co. £25 for the printing of Vogt, it being agreed that this was to be repaid out of the SALE of COPIES, before any other deductions. Moreover, they owe me a few pounds for Hinter den Coulissent the Communist Trial1 and the 18th Brumaire? etc.247

On the other hand, I obtained newspapers and books from the fellows to the value of £10 9/-, if only to be in possession of some security.

Koller (an associé*) has now had a row with Petsch, who is not in the business at present. There's a lawsuit pending between the two over the firm's liquidation.

The rascally Koller, whom I pressed about my claim, wrote instead advising me of his suit in the COUNTY-COURT 7 regarding the £10 9/-. I went to see Zimmermann. He told me that my suit

[^1]: a Ecce Herum Crispinus (Behold, this Crispinus again). Juvenal, Satirae, IV, 1 (figuratively: the same again). - b [G. Lommel,] Hinter den Coulissen. Historisch- politische Bilder aus der Neuzeit, I. Theil. Vom Oktober 1847 bis Mai 1848. - c K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - d K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - e partner



