---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "191. Mar x to Engels. 20 November "
Page_Range: "365-367"
---

# 191. Mar x to Engels. 20 November 



**[p. 1861]**

would cost me about £30-£60 in a SUPERIOR COURT, and that it would be better if I established my claim in the form of a counter-claim in the COUNTY-COURT, to which I had been summoned by Koller. Nor does he himself practise in the COUNTY-COURTS. SO, to this end, I shall have to see an English SOLICITOR before the week is out (and as soon as possible), which I can't do without CASH.

If I were quit of this wretched situation and did not see my family oppressed by MISERABLE adversities, how overjoyed I would be at the fiasco of the Decembrist financial system, so long and so frequently prognosticated by me in the Tribune. So William the Handsome or handsome William has done some plain speaking in Silesia: 'If you elect democrats, we shall be ruined.' 'Soldiers are the only answer to democrats.' 3 6 3

Salut. ,r Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first

191

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 20 November' [1861]

Dear Engels,

K. M.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: This is to acknowledge, in much haste, receipt of the £5, also the Manchester Guardians which arrived the day before yesterday. I am now going straight to a SOLICITOR." My wife is very much affected []b and I fear the thing will end badly, if there is a long

[^3]: STRUGGLE.

[^4]: Salut. Y o u r

[^5]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a See this volume, p. 327. - h Word illegible.





**[p. 192]**

ENGELS TO MARX249

IN LONDON

Manchester, 27 November 1861

Dear Moor,

Have the YANKEES gone quite out of their minds, playing such a mad trick on the CONFEDERATE COMMISSIONERS? 366 The FACT that even over here in the Channel, a warship was lying in wait for the MAIL STEAMER shows that general instructions had gone out from Washington. There could be no clearer casus belli11 than to forcibly seize political prisoners on board a foreign vessel. The fellows must be completely crazy to saddle themselves with a war against England. If war should really break out, you could send your letters to New York via Germany or Le Havre, under cover to a third party, but you'll have to take care that you're not aiding and abetting the ENEMIES of the QUEEN.b

I was delighted to hear that Bakunin had bolted. The poor devil must have been very much the worse for wear. What a way to make a journey round the world!36'

Monsieur Bonaparte would also seem to get no money and Fould pretty well at his wits' end.364 I can't help wondering what's going to happen there.

Things are going swimmingly in Russia and Poland, and now there's also a chance that good old Prussia may at long last be involved in a crisis, provided the electors don't allow themselves to be intimidated again.368 But the purse, the purse! That may well serve to keep the few 'men of Progress' afloat a little while longer. In Cologne it is even rumoured that good old Heinrich Bürgers might stand for Parliament.

Varnhagen's Tagebiicherc must be quite interesting. All the same, the fellow was a scurvy, cowardly knave. There was quite a witty article about the thing in the Kreuz-Zeitung,—full of spite and malice, of course.'1

[^1]: kl cause of war - b Victoria - c K. A. Varnhagen von Ense, Tagebücher. Aus dem Nachlaß Varnhagen's von Ense, Bd. I-II, Leipzig, 1861. - d 'Varnhagen und seine "Pulverkammer"', Neue Preussische Zeitung, 24 November 1861 (supplement).



