---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "192. Engel s to Marx. 27 November 329' 193. Engels to Marx. 2 December Ł. "
Page_Range: "367-368"
---

# 192. Engel s to Marx. 27 November 329' 193. Engels to Marx. 2 December Ł. 



**[p. 330]**

On 1 December, I shall send you another fiver. Many regards,

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K, Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f i r s t t l m e

193

ENGELS TO MARX369

IN LONDON

[Manchester, 2 December 1861]

I/Z 07595, Newcastle on Tyne, 14 August 1860 Dear Moor,

The above is the number of the enclosed fiver, which could not go off till today, as the first of December fell on a Sunday. Once again, I didn't register it.

During the past few days I have at last read some of the Lassalle.a His stuff about retroaction may be quite plausible, but doesn't hold water, as is apparent, e.g., in the case of divorce legislation, of which it might also be said, and has in fact been said by many a Berlin philistine: 'If I'd known how difficult it was to get divorced, I should never have got married.' By the way, it's grossly superstitious of the fellow to go on believing in the 'idea of law', absolute law. His objections to Hegel's philosophy of law are for the most part perfectly justified, but he hasn't yet really got into his stride with his new philosophy of mind; even from the philosophical standpoint he should have progressed sufficiently to regard the process alone, not just its momentary result, as the absolute, in which case no other idea of law could follow than precisely the historical process itself. The style's nice, too. 'The hand-wringing despair of the contradictions', etc., and then the introduction. Pure Ephraim Artful. I dare say I shan't get very much further, unless I find it might come in useful as a course in Roman law, in which case I shall read the whole thing. How,

[^1]: a F. Lassalle, Das System der erworbenen Rechte.



