---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "194. Marx to Engels. 5 December "
Page_Range: "368-369"
---

# 194. Marx to Engels. 5 December 



**[p. 331]**

au fond? insignificant an idea chasing right through the Corpus juris,3,10 applying it to every single point—as though it would gain weight in the process—is quite beyond my comprehension. But even nicer is the assumption that this WILD GOOSE CHASE, conducted in and around the 'plenitude of the concrete', is the proof of his pudding and he must therefore remain infallible ever after.

In Berlin things will now begin to hum. The new little Chamber's half-hearted 'progress' democracy371 will prove too red for handsome William, after all, and by March they'll already find themselves in a state of mild chronic crisis. I am curious to see what happens. If only the chaps in the Chamber aren't too timid, they will yet succeed in toppling the handsome one, but I don't trust that democratic breed.

I hope your wife is feeling better. Cordial regards to her and the girls.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, igj3 Published in English in full for the first time

194

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 5 December [1861] Dear Engels,

Didn't send an acknowledgment sooner because afflicted by great TROUBLE. My wife is very indisposed. I shall write to you this evening, as I have to concoct an article today.b

Salut.

Your

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwis- Printed according to the original chen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: 11 basically - b Presumably 'The Principal Actors in the Trent Drama', which Marx dated 4 December 1861.

[^4]: 14—558



