---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "196. Marx to Engels. 13 December "
Page_Range: "370-371"
---

# 196. Marx to Engels. 13 December 

There isn't going to be war with America, as I have said from the very beginning in the Presse,3 and I am only sorry I didn't have the means to exploit the boneheadedness of a Stock Exchange dominated during this silly season by Reuter and The Times.

I agree with your STRICTURES ON Izzyb (who writes from Florence to say he'has had a very interesting meeting' with Garibaldi, etc.). The 2nd volume is more interesting, if only by reason of the Latin quotations. Ideologism permeates everything, and the dialectical method is wrongly applied. Hegel never described as dialectics the subsumption of vast numbers of 'CASES' UNDER A GENERAL PRINCIPLE.

My writing is progressing, but slowly.310 Circumstances being what they were, there was, indeed, little possibility of bringing such theoretical matters to a rapid close. However, the thing is assuming a much more popular form, and the method is much less in evidence than in Part I.c

Salut. Your

196

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 13 December 1861 Dear Frederick,

[^1]: K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: Best thanks for your letter.232

[^4]: IN COMPENSATION for services previously rendered,0 Dronke sent £5 by return, and yesterday he himself came up to town where he had a meeting with one of his directors.

[^5]: •' K. Marx, 'The Trent Case', Die Presse, No. 331, 2 December 1861. - b See this \olume, pp. 330-31. - c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - d See this volume, p. 332.

[^6]: 14*



