---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "198. Marx to Engels. 27 December "
Page_Range: "374-376"
---

# 198. Marx to Engels. 27 December 

STOPPAGE Of FURTHER PAYMENT o f t h e Du TCH-Ru SSIAN LOAN 9) a n d diversion of attention from Denmark where Russia is engaged at this moment in ousting Glücksburg, the HEIR PRESUMPTIVE appointed by herself.380

It is, OF COURSE, possible that the Yankees won't give way, and, in that case, Pam will be forced into war by his preparations and rodomontade to date. However, I would rate the odds at 100 to 1 against.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f i r s t t i m e

198

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 27 December 1861

Dear Engels,

When the outside world first began to 'dun' me, I wrote — since I didn't want to be always pestering you — not only to my mother and other relations, but also to Siebel. Now that young man, as I see from his letter, has again written to you. Consider the matter as non avenue."

I don't yet know quite how I am to weather this crisis. Whatever happens—since otherwise it would be plainly impossible—I shall write to my LANDLORD and tell him that he cannot be paid now, that I intend to give him a bill, etc.

The court case is also going wrong.b Since the point at issue turns on PARTNERSHIP, my LAWYER considers it necessary—if I am not

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: I am extremely vexed that you should have had to give Dronke an I.O.U. for my sake. Originally, he promised to arrange the matter in less onerous a form and to give longer TERMS.*73

[^3]: not having happened - h See this volume, pp. 327-28 and 334.



T h e rotten Presse is printing barely half my articles. They're jackasses. I wonder how they propose to pay, whether I'm expected to write individual articles on 'spec', or what?

In the meantime, may I wish you in advance every happiness for the New Year. If it's anything like the old one, I, for my part, would sooner consign it to the devil.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

