---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "201. Mar x to Johann Philipp Becker. 26 February "
Page_Range: "378-380"
---

# 201. Mar x to Johann Philipp Becker. 26 February 

physical indisposition. (Apropos. Yesterday Allen prescribed wine for her, and I'd therefore be grateful if you could send down a few bottles.) For instance, unbeknown to us, she called on Mrs Young to see whether she mightn't go on the stage.

TAKE ALL IN ALL, leading such a dog's life is hardly WORTH WHILE. As regards the copies of Urquhart's paper,a I haven't yet been able to get hold of them. Write and let me know with which issue to begin, and Collet will do what is necessary. Herewith the chap's denunciation of Bakunin,b whom I haven't seen. He is living at Herzen's place.

Have you by any chance inquired whether Lassalle's opusc did in fact go off to August Philips?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, IOIQ Published in English lor the tirst time

201

London, 26 February 1862

Dear Becker,

You must attribute my prolonged silence to one thing only—my inability to help. The American civil war has meant the total loss of my principal source of income for a whole year. Subsequently (a couple of months ago), this 'business' was resumed, but on a very 'restricted' basis.384 So far as acquaintances are concerned, however, I can count very few who have any means at their disposal. E. g., it is some while since that I wrote to Siebel on your behalf42 but I am told by Borkheim that he gave no signs of life. In Manchester, a few 'revolutionary adventurers, who were sailing

[^1]: MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER383

[^2]: IN GENEVA

[^3]: a The Free Press. See this volume, p. 344. - b Probably Collet's article 'Bakunin' in The Free Press, Vol. X, No. 3, 5 March 1862. - c Das System der erworbenen Rechte



Now, as regards the subscription to your work,3 I shall do my utmost but can hold out little hope. All the riff-raff in the associations here—with the exception of the Workers' Educational Society,3 which has nothing in the way of funds— is constitutional, and actually favours the Prussian National Association.24 The fellows would sooner give money to have a work like yours suppressed. As you probably know, these Germans, both young and old, are all of them pert men of sterling worth and practical insight, and look upon people like you and me as immature fools who have still not recovered from their revolutionary fancies. Nor is the riff-raff at home any better than it is abroad. The time I spent in Berlin,b etc., convinced me that any attempt to influence the canaille by literary means would prove utterly futile. The fellows' self-complacent stupidity, which possesses in its press— that pitiable press—an extraordinary elixir of life, is beyond belief. And then the spiritual passivity to boot—nothing short of a sound thrashing would reanimate your stolid German who, having lost his philosophical illusions and applied himself to money-making and 'Little Germany' and 'practical constitutional- ism', is now no better than an impulsive CLOWN. So far as I'm concerned, Germany may altogether [],' but a roomful of precocious and decrepit children."1

The Hermann is the property of the erstwhile Royal Prussian Procurator Heintzmann: 'with God for King and Fatherland', 'a modicum of Little Germany' and moderation in the exercise of freedom. A namesake of yours, one Becker from Leipzig, who writes for that paper, is a good chap but not influential enough to help us in a matter such as a subscription. Engels only returned to Manchester a few days ago after an absence of several months. He and Wolff (of Breslau)e will do what they can. However, with the exception of the above-named and 3 or 4 others, the numerous German population in Manchester consists of the same philistines as it does here and everywhere else.

Quoad1 'Vogt'g, do with it as you please. It goes without saying, of course, that I could not but be delighted if the pamphlet which

[^1]: a J. Ph. Becker, Wie und Wann? Ein ernstes Wort über die Fragen und Aufgaben der Zeit, Geneva, London. Manchester, 1862. - b See this volume, pp. 279-82, 286-89. - c Manuscript damaged. - d Allusion to a passage in Heine's poem, 'Zur Beruhigung' (paraphrased). - e Wilhelm Wolff - f As regards - s K. Marx, Herr Vogt.



