---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "203. Marx to Engels. 3 March "
Page_Range: "381-383"
---

# 203. Marx to Engels. 3 March 



**[p. 344]**

I shall get the £2 for Koller3 off to you tomorrow or on Monday.b

This year, I am spending more than my income. The crisis is affecting us badly,385 we have no orders, and, starting from next week, shall be working merely half-time. Nevertheless, I have to get hold of the £50 for Dronke within 4 weeks and next week there's a year's rent to be paid for my lodgings. I'm moving out; this morning that damned Sarahc stole the money from my coat pocket. So, don't address anything more to Thorncliffe Grove. I'm living with Mary nearly all the time now so as to spend as little money as possible; unfortunately, I can't dispense with my LODGINGS, otherwise I should move in with her altogether. I haven't got any new lodgings as yet and shall have to go and look for some.386 Write again soon and let me know how things are going. What is the Tribune up to?384

Would you like a military article on America for the Presse?

The numbers of The Free Press I am short of are October- February 1861/62.

Best wishes to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

203

[London,] 3 March 1862

Dear Engels,

I am sending my wife to a LOAN OFFICE today to see what can be done there, for I've had a disgustingly rude letter from my LANDLORD, and, if the fellow puts a BROKER into the house, I shall be sued by all and sundry.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1923 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS249

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 340. - b 3 March - c Sarah Parker



T h e wine hasn't arrived yet. I should be grateful if you could let me have this week (by Friday morning 3) an article in English on the American war.387 You can write it without the slightest misgiving. T h e Tribune will print it as the LETTER OF A FOREIGN OFFICER. Nota bene: T h e Tribune hates Mc Clellan, who is in league with the Democratic Party and, throughout the period in which he was COMMANDER IN CHIEF OK AIL THE ARMIES, prevented any action by intervening directly not only on the Potomac (where this may have been justified), but in every theatre of war, especially in the west. (He was also at the bottom of the highly infamous intrigue against Fremont.388) Moreover, out of esprit de corps and a hatred of CIVILIANS, this same Mac has sheltered all the army's traitors, e.g., Colonel Maynard and General Stone. T h e latter's arrest took place a day or 2 after Clellan had been dismissed as COMMANDER IN CHIEF of all the armies. Similarly, the New York Herald's impudent 'REPRÉSENTA FIVE' b in Washington was arrested as a SPY against Mc Clellan's wishes, having on the previous day entertained Mc C.'s entire STAFF to a champagne breakfast.

You will recall my having told you from the start that nothing would come of the expectations regarding the China trade. This is confirmed by the latest BOARD OF TRADE report: c

1860 1861 [£] [£] China 2,872,045 3,114,157 Hong Kong 2,445,991 1,733,967

Total 5,318,036 4,848,124

[^1]: So, a decrease in total exports. More of them direct, fewer via H o n g Kong. In the meantime, the Russians have seized another fine island off Korea.'1 Add to this their new 'OCCUPAI IONS' in Java," and their supremacy of the NORTHERN PACIFIC is assured.' 8 9 T h e extent to which Pam's influence has russified the entire English press is borne out by its profound silence over Russia's PROGRESS in this area, ditto its passive attitude vis-à-vis Poland.

[^2]: a 7 March - b Malcolm Ives - c 'Accounts relating to Trade and Navigation for the Year ended December 31, 1861. Exports of British and Irish Produce and Manufactures', The Economist, No. 966, 1 March 1862. - d Tsushima - c Should read 'Japan'. See this volume, p. 347.



