---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "204. Engels to Marx. 5 March "
Page_Range: "383-384"
---

# 204. Engels to Marx. 5 March 



**[p. 346]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, „ , .. , , . „ . . . . r ,, , , , „ . „ Published in English in full for the first time

204

ENGELS TO MARX249

IN LONDON

Manchester, 5 March 1862

Dear Moor,

Enclosed POST OFFICE ORDER for £2, Camden Town. The book" went off long ago, i.e. on 9 October,in a parcel to our agent E. Schröder in Amsterdam, and was enclosed in bale no. 118 for B. ter Haar and Son of that city. I enclosed a note to Schröder at the time, asking him to see to the thing. Everything was correctly addressed to your cousin ;c so all he can do, if he ' hasn't got it yet, is approach Schröder.

You shall have the article.387 The braggarts of the South are now getting a splendid thrashing. Most cheering of all is the reception met with everywhere by the gunboats on the Tennessee river as far up as Florence, Alabama (here the mussel shoals begin, disrupting navigation). So in west Tennessee, in the plains, the majority is also decidedly pro-Union. 15,000 prisoners, including Johnston, the Confederates' best general, who decided Bull Run by his rapid concentration on the centre, is no laughing matter.390

I shall be seeing Lupus this evening. If he can advance me something until 1 July, I shall get it for you. I myself shall be au

[^1]: a F. Lassalle, Das System der erworbenen Rechte. - b See this volume, pp. 313, 315, 320, 322, 341, and this page (the next letter). - c August Philips



