---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "205. Marx to Engels. 6 March "
Page_Range: "384-388"
---

# 205. Marx to Engels. 6 March 



**[p. 347]**

sec1 until then. Should there be [no] peace or some other settlement in America, it may well be that my total income from 1 July 1861-62 will be reduced to £100 and I shall thus run into debt. We have a whole heap of goods and can't sell a thing and, if we are saddled with them until matters in America have been straightened out, we are likely to lose all the profit made up till the end of December.385 However, I imagine the scrap will continue, for I don't see how the fellows can make peace.

What's this about a Russian island off Korea?b And what's this about occupations in Java? (QUERY Japan?) Je n'en sais rien? How about the Free Presses?

By the way, according to your figures, trade with China has surely increased significantly. 10 years ago, if I remember rightly, it alternated between 1 and 3 millions.

How is little Jenny? Warm regards to her, your wife and Laura.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engeis und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published ,n English m full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 first time

205

[London,] 6 March 1862

Dear Frederick,

My best thanks for the POST OFFICE order and the wine. That swine Koller, who has an I.O.U. of mine, had already dunned me yesterday.d

I enclose herewith the 3 last Free Presses? I haven't yet seen Collet in person, but feel sure he will be able to get hold of the other numbers as well.

In my letter to you, read Japan for Java.1 I obtained the actual FACTS from sundry numbers of the Tribune which contained the

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS249

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a without cash - b See this volume, p. 345. - c I know nothing about it. - d See this volume, p. 340. - e ibid., pp. 344, and this page (the previous letter). - f ibid., p. 345.





**[p. 348]**

Chinese trade, compared with what it was like up to 1852, has certainly increased, but by no means on the same scale .is have all other markets since the Californian-Australian discoveries.59]

Moreover, in earlier REPORTS Hong Kong, as an English possession, is shown separately from China, so that exports under the heading 'China' invariably (from the 40s on) amount to less than total exports. Finally, the increment achieved since 1859 fell back in 1861 to its former level.

In consequence of the American crisis, the BOARD OF TRADE report for 1861d shows a considerable change in the ranking order of the various markets for English exports. India leads with £17,923,767 (including Ceylon and Singapore. India alone, £16,412,090).

'Second market Germany, normally 4th. I860: £13,491,523. 1861: £12,937,073 (not including what goes via Holland and, to a lesser degree, via Belgium). In view of Germany's economic importance to England, what a diplomatic advantage it would give us, circumstances being different, over bluff John Bull!

France this year the 5th market. 1860: £5,249,980. 1861: £8,896,282. However, that includes Switzerland as well. England, on the other hand, now ranks as the premier market for France.

Out of the total exports of £125,115,133 (1861), £42,260,970 go to English 'POSSESSIONS' and 'COLONIES'. If one adds to that what England exports to other parts of Asia, Africa and America, there remains at most 23 to 24% for export to the countries of Europe.

[^1]: a Tsushima - b 'Russian Progress in Asia', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6497, 30 January 1862. - c Hokkaido - •' 'Accounts relating to Trade and Navigation for the Year ended December 31, 1861. Exports of British and Irish Produce and Manufactures', The Economist, No. 966, 1 March 1862.





**[p. 349]**

T o me it does not seem very PROBABLE that the SOUTHERNERS will have concluded peace by July 1862. When the NORTHERNERS have 1. secured the BORDER STATES—and it is upon these, in fact, that everything has centred from the start a—and 2. the Mississippi as far as New Orleans and Texas, the war may well enter a 2nd phase during which the NORTHERNERS will make no great exertions of a military nature but, by isolating the GULF STATES,339 finally bring them to the point of voluntary RE ANNEXATION.

During this war Bull has acted with what must be wholly unprecedented effrontery.393

In terms of brutality on the English side, the Mexican Blue Book'' exceeds anything previously known in history. Menshikov appears a GENTLEMAN compared with Sir C. Lennox Wyke. Not only does this blackguard evince the most immoderate zèle' in the execution of Pam's secret instructions but, by his insolence, also seeks to avenge himself for the fact that, in the exchange of diplomatic dispatches, Sefior Zamacona, the Mexican Foreign Minister (how resigned) and erstwhile journalist, invariably proves himself superior. As for the chap's style, herewith a few examples from his dispatches to Zamacona.

[^1]: * 'The arbitrary act of stopping all payments for the space of two years394 is depriving the parties interested of their money for that space of time, which is a dead loss of so much value to them.' 'A starving man may justify, in his own eyes, the fact of stealing a loaf on the ground that imperious necessity impelled him thereto; but such an argument cannot, in a moral point of view, justify his violation of the law, which remains as positive, apart from all sentimentality, as if the crime had not had an excuse. // he was actually starving, he should have first asked the baker to assuage his hunger, but doing so' (starving?) 'of his own free will, without permission, is acting exactly as the Mexican government has done towards its creditors on the present occasion.' 'With regard to the light in which you view the question, as expressed in

[^2]: *' See this volume p. 277. - b Correspondence Respecting the Affairs of Mexico. Parts I-III, London, 1862. - ' zeal





**[p. 350]**

'I have a duty to perform both to my own Gvt. and to that to which I am accredited, which impels me,' etc.c

'I suspend all official relations with the Government of this Republic until that of Her Majestyd shall adopt such measures as they shall deem necessary.*'c

Zamacona writes and tells him that the INTRIGUES of FOREIGN DIPLOMATISTS in the past 25 years have been largely to blame for the TROUBLES in Mexico/ Wyke replies that

*'the population of Mexico is so degraded as to make them dangerous, not only to themselves, but to everybody coming into contact with them!'*^

Zamacona writes, saying that the propositions he [Wyke] has made would put an end to the Republic's independence, and were incompatible with the dignity of any independent state.h Wyke replies:

* 'Excuse me for adding that such a proposition as I have made to you does not necessarily become undignified and impracticable simply because you, an interested person,'* (i.e., Foreign Minister of Mexico) *'are pleased to say so.'*'

[^1]: But satis superque) According to a letter from Schily to Rheinländer, things look most precarious in Paris and, unless there is war, Badinguet , 6 3

[^2]: cannot hold on bor. another year. What bad luck for the chap that he should have the Parisians to govern, and not the Berliners, who admire him.

[^3]: Salut.

[^4]: Your

[^5]: K. M.

[^6]: PS. 1. How do I translate GIGS into German?

[^7]: 2. What are FEEDERS ON CIRCULAR FRAMES? 3. Could you inform me of all the different types of workers employed, e.g., at your mill (all, that is, EXCEPT THE WAREHOUSE), and in what proportion to each other? For in my book 3 1 0 I need an

[^8]: a Zamacona to C. Wyke, 21 July 1861. - l) C. Wyke to Zamacona, 22 July 1861. - c C. Wyke to Zamacona, 23 July 1861. - d Victoria - e C. Wyke to Zamacona, 25 July 1861. - f Zamacona to C. Wyke, 25 July 1861. - s C. Wyke to Zamacona, 26 July 1861. - h Zamacona to C. Wyke, 27 July 1861. - ' C. Wyke to Zamacona, 30 July 1861. - i More than enough



