---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "206. Engels to Marx. About 8 March "
Page_Range: "388-389"
---

# 206. Engels to Marx. About 8 March 

example showing that, in mechanical workshops, the division of labour, as .forming the basis of manufacture and as described by A. Smith, does not exist. The proposition itself has already been set forth by Ure.a All that is needed is an example of some kind.

I must write and tell the chaps at the Presse that some new ARRANGEMENT will have to be made. It's all the same to me if they don't print the best articles (although I always write them in such a way that they can print them). But financially it's no go if, out of every 4 or 5 articles, they print 1 and only pay for 1. That places me far below the PENNY-A-LINERS.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, [Çj]g Published in English in full for the first time

206

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester, about 8 March 1862]

Dear Moor,

Encl. what I had promised. The second article will follow next week.b I haven't seen Lupus yet; shall call on him this evening. The Free Presses and your letter have arrived/

Do you know a Prussian refugee by the name of Sippel (Sippel),d a mathematician? Apparently, the chap was tutor to a family by the name of Montgomery in Hampstead, was arrested before the amnesty256 while travelling with this family in Prussia and not released until several months later, and is now said to be applying for a post as professor of mathematics at the University of Belfast. Someone up here wants to know more about the man, presumably in connection with some BUSINESS or other.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: 11 A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, vols. I-II, London, 1776; A. Ure, The Philosophy of Manufactures: or, an Exposition of the Scientific, Moral and Commercial Economy of the Factory System, of Great Britain, 2nd ed., London, 1835. - b See this volume, pp. 345, 346. - ' ibid., p. 347. - d In the original the name is written in both German and Roman characters.



