---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "207. Marx to Engels. 15 March "
Page_Range: "389-390"
---

# 207. Marx to Engels. 15 March 



**[p. 352]**

Your

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1930

Published in English for the first time

207

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 March 1862

Dear Engels,

Because your article" failed to arrive, I have been unable to write to New York today. My relations with the Tribune are no longer such that, if (assuming they print the article) I send them SOMETHING ELSE in place of the sequel, they will print it. Rather, I am convinced that they are on the point of giving me my congé again along with all the other European correspondents. Their format has been reduced. They print perhaps one article in 3 or none at all. These are the usual indications of such a procedure.

So, let me have the sequel by Tuesdayh or better still, the conclusion, since it is only the conjectural part relating to the future that can be of any real interest to them.

I'm not getting on very well with my book,310 since work is often checked, i.e. suspended, for weeks on end by domestic distur- bances. Little Jenny is still by no means as well as she should be.'

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zxvischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jcjjg Published in English for the first

[^2]: time

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 345, 346, 351. - b 18 March - c See this volume, pp. 340-41.



