---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "209. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 April "
Page_Range: "392-395"
---

# 209. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 April 

written by the last named and Eichhoff has seen it) refused to proceed with the matter, and it was only with difficulty that Gottfried engineered the final 'set-to'.399 However, I am writing to Eichhoff, instructing him to drop the matter for the time being, since otherwise he'll take the edge off Gottfried's defeat.42 For Juctr is too cowardly to come out with Beta's letter. Otherwise, he would have already done so of his own accord in a note appended to the latter's statement.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Little Jenny is still far from being her proper self.3 Our youngestb has been seriously ill but is now recovered. You should read the enclosed excerpts from Urquhart.c

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t i m e

209

London, 28 April 1862 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

You'll be terribly angry with me, OLD BOY, and justifiably so, but, at the same time, with absolutely no justification. If I postponed writing to you from one day to the next, it was because I was hoping from one day to the next to put my affairs so far in order as to be able at least to pay off the £10 I owed you and, besides, write to you with an easy mind. Instead, the situation has grown worse every day. The Tribune, with which I had taken up

[^1]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE400

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 340-41, 352. - b Eleanor Marx - c From The Free Press published by Urquhart.





**[p. 356]**

again—though at V3 of my former income—has finally got rid of all its foreign correspondents. So, I now find myself in a complete vacuum. I have no intention of treating you to a tale of woe of any sort; it's a wonder I haven't actually gone mad. If I mention the beastly mess at all, it's simply so that my other misfortunes should not be compounded by a misunderstanding with you.

What you say about J. Ph. Becker in your last letter is absolutely wrong.401 I. e., you don't know the man except from hearsay. He is one of the noblest German revolutionaries there has been since 1830, a man who can be reproached with nothing save an en- thusiasm which fails to take account of circumstances. As for his connections with the Italians, a bosom friend of Orsini's3 has entrusted me with papers that leave no room for doubt on this score, whatever the Italians, and even Garibaldi, may say. As for his relationship with Tiirr—whom I had denounced over here in The Free Press even before 1859402—all it amounts to is this: During the Baden campaign403 Becker made Türr a lieutenant. Hence a kind of comradely relationship. Had Becker intended to exploit this connection and accept the offers made him in Paris by Türr

in the presence of one of my London friends,13 he would not have endured the martyrdom which he, a man of 60, is in fact enduring. I know full well the sources whence Becker has obtained his exiguous financial support. They are confined to people within our closest circle. True, he fell foul of some of the Italians because his strongly Teutonic sentiments caused him to reject certain well-intentioned plans. It is indeed exasperating that men of Becker's stamp should be so egregiously slandered.

As for my book?10 it won't be finished for another two months. During the past year, to keep myself from starving, I have had to do the most despicable hackwork and have often gone for months without being able to add a line to the 'thing'. And there is also that quirk I have of finding fault with anything I have written and not looked at for a month, so that I have to revise it completely. At all events, the work loses nothing thereby, and pro annoc the German public has, after all, far weightier things to think about.

Ad vocemd your booke which I have of course now quite finished, and individual chapters reread, it strikes me that you apparently haven't read Vico's 'new science'. Not that you'd have found anything in it immediately to your purpose; but it does provide a philosophical view of the spirit of Roman law,

[^1]: a Marx probably means Simon François Bernard. - b Victor Schily - c for this year - d As regards - e Das System der erworbenen Rechte





**[p. 357]**

contrasting with that of the legal philistines. You would scarcely be able to work your way through the original, as it is not only written in Italian but in a very peculiar Neapolitan idiom." However, I commend the French translation, La Science nouvelle, etc.; traduite par l'auteur de l'essai sur la formation du dogme catholique. Paris, Charpentier, Editeur—1844. To whet your appetite, I shall do no more than quote the following sentences:

'L'ancien droit romain a été un poème sérieux, et l'ancienne jurisprudence a été une poésie sévère dans laquelle se trouvent renfermés les premiers efforts de la métaphysique légale.' 'l'ancienne jurisprudence était très poétique, puisqu'elle supposait vrais les faits qui ne l'étaient pas, et qu'elle refusait d'admettre comme vrais les faits qui l'étaient en effet; qu'elle considérait les vwans comme morts, et les morts comme vivans dans leurs héritages.' 'Les Latins nommèrent heri les héros; d'où vient le mot hereditas l'héritier représente, vis-à-vis de l'héritage, le père de famille défunt.'b

Vico contains in embryo Wolf (Horher),c Niebuhr {Römische Königsgeschichte),A the fundamentals of comparative linguistics (even if in fanciful form) and a whole mass of really inspired stuff. So far, I have never been able to get hold of his legal writings proper.

Under the circumstances in which I now find myself (and have found myself for the better part of a year) I shall not be able to do a critique of your book until BY AND BY. On the other hand, I should be grateful, not for my own sake, but for that of my wife, if, without a prior quid pro quo on my part, you could let Brockhaus advertise the first part of the political economy.

Never have the English middle classes (and aristocracy) put their foot in it with such effrontery as during the great struggle that is taking place on the far side of the Atlantic. By contrast, the English WORKING CLASS, which suffers most from the bellum civile,' has never before shown itself as heroic and noble. This is the more admirable when one knows, as I do, all the mechanisms that were set in motion, both here and in Manchester, to incite them to stage

[^1]: a G. Vico, Principj di una scienza nuova. - b 'Ancient Roman law was a grave poem and ancient jurisprudence austere poetry which contained the first attempt to formulate legal metaphysics.' 'ancient jurisprudence was highly poetical in that it supposed true those facts that were not so, and refused to admit the truth of facts that were so indeed; in that it regarded the living as dead, and the dead as living in their inheritance.' 'The Latins called heroes heri; whence comes the word hereditas the heir represents, vis-à-vis the inheritance, the deceased pater familias.' - (: F. A. Wolfius, Prolegomena ad Homerum sive de operum homericorum prisca et genuina

[^2]: forma variisque mutationibus et probahili ratione emendadi, Vol. I, Halis saxonum, 1795. - d B. G. Niebuhr, Römische Geschichte, Th. I-III, Berlin, 1827-32. - '' civil war



