---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "211. Mar x to Engels. 6 May "
Page_Range: "399-400"
---

# 211. Mar x to Engels. 6 May 



**[p. 211]**

MARX TO ENGELS249

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 May [1862]

Dear Frederick,

As soon as you have shown it to Lupus, send back the enclosed, exceedingly odd letter, which was published, although mutilated, in the Siècle, the Temps and the Progrès de Lyon, by the jeunesse hongroise à Paris* and sent to me by Schily.409 This same 'jeunesse' now proposes to let loose a pamphlet containing remarkable revelations about the Kossuth-Klapka-Türr triumvirate in Paris.

Apropos. You might communicate the FACTS contained in the letter to Eichhoff, 57 Ranelagh Street, Liverpool. He can get the thing into the Zeitung für Norddeutschland (Hanover).

A little while ago, so Schily writes, the Bern Bundb (mightn't you be able to look this up at the Club?) carried a statement by a Hungarian refugee in which Vogt is called 'the Palais Royal's410

fattened sow', while Fazy, Kossuth, Klapka, and Türr figure as 'scoundrels and gamblers'.

I have got back 330 copies of Vogtc from that blackguard Koller. If only I knew of an opening! Might this not be the moment to dispose of them at a 100 p.c. loss? I. e., in Geneva and Bern. How opportune that would be just now!

I shall send you the April and May numbers of the Press.d In future you shall have them regularly. I shall procure the other stuff for you, i.e. the ESTIMATES.

As TO WINE, what the children most prefer, of course, is a motley collection. I believe that, according to Allen, claret and port are best.

I shall write to Dana again. I sorely miss their sending me the Tribune. This is a rotten trick of Greeley's and Mc Elrath's. I discovered two things in the final March numbers of the Tribune. First, that Mc Clellan had been fully informed a week beforehand about the withdrawal of the CONFEDERATES." Secondly, that during

[^1]: a young Hungarians in Paris - b Der Bund. Eidgenössisches Centralblatt. Organ der freisinnig-demokratischen schweizerischen und bernischen Politik - <•' K. Marx, Herr Vogt (see this volume, pp. 327, 337-38, 340). - d The Free Press - e Marx probably has in mind the article 'President Lincoln's Strategy' in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6542, 24 March 1862.



