---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "212. Engels to Marx. 12 May "
Page_Range: "400-401"
---

# 212. Engels to Marx. 12 May 



**[p. 363]**

In Prussia, things will get to the point of a coup d'état, not however to a coup d'éclat!'

The explanation for Bonaparte's present manoeuvres in Mex- ico411 (the affair was originally of Pam's contriving) is that Juarez will acknowledge only the official debt of £46,000 to France. But Miramôn and his gang had issued, through the Swiss bankers Jecker et Co., government bonds to the tune of 52,000,000 dollars (on which ABOUT 4 mill, dollars had been paid). These government bonds—Jecker et Co. merely hommes de paille"—fell into the hands of Morny et Co. for next to nothing. They are demanding that Juarez acknowledge the same. Hinc Mae lacrimae.d

Schurz is—a Brigadier-General with Fremont!!!

Your

K. M.

Borkheim paid me the balance last Friday."

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, iq|<j Published in English in full for the first time

212

Manchester, 12 May 1862

Dear Moor,

Herewith in all haste £10 (O/A 40602, Manchester, 24 Jan. 1862), with which to set the butcher's mind at rest. Since I arrive in London at 5 o'clock tomorrow morning and have to leave again at 7 in the morning, I shall not, alas, be able to meet you.

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX249

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a 'The Censorship of the Press', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6541, 22 March 1862. - h A play on words meaning (here) decisive clash. - c men of straw - d Hence these tears (Terence, Andria, I, i, 99). - <" See this volume, pp. 354, 359.

[^4]: 15—558



