---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "219. Engel s to Carl Siebel. 4 June "
Page_Range: "411-413"
---

# 219. Engel s to Carl Siebel. 4 June 



**[p. 374]**

How is little Jenny getting on?

Warm regards to your wife and the children. Eichhoff 's thing3

returned herewith.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

219

ENGELS TO CARL SIEBEL

IN BARMEN

Manchester, 4 June 1862

Dear Siebel,

You're a fine Or T», you are, notifying me of your daughter's birth after the same fashion as I [use] to acknowledge your various letters and packages. My heartiest congratulations. I hope you'll have a lot of fun with her. Is your wife all right?

Here things trundle along as always. All the same, I'm gradually beginning to notice how demoralising this quiet routine is; one is drained of all one's energy and becomes thoroughly indolent. I even read another novel recently.

The so-called—salva veniah—Schiller Institute429 (also known as the Jerusalem Club) has become a purely Jewish institution and, between 1:30 and 3, the din there is enough to drive one out of one's mind. In fact, I very seldom visit the noble institution now. What's happening is typically Jewish. To start off with they thank God for having a Schiller Institute, and barely are they installed than, apparently, it's not good enough for them, and they want to put up a large building, a veritable temple of Moses, and to move the thing there. That, of course, is the shortest road to bankruptcy. And it's for that you had to write a prologue and act as producer! And that's what they call a German national

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 369. - b if one may refer to it thus





**[p. 375]**

institution! Mark my words, in a couple of years you'll be sent a circular: Re the bankruptcy of the late Schiller Institute', etc.

'Re' your letters, let me reply very briefly as follows. So far as the affair with Marx is concerned, he would certainly not have turned to you if my resources hadn't already been exhausted, as was indeed the case, which meant that I could do nothing just then. As for red Becker (whose pamphlet3 was of great interest to me, partly because it contains a RECANTATION of his former 'wild' opinions, and also because the Prussian government has forcibly turned the chap into a local bigwig again, and hence into a Deputy), the fellow is no immediate concern of ours. He has never belonged to our party as such, has always been a mere democrat, and he only became involved in the business of the Communist trial in Cologne2 because he regarded the affair as an opportunity for agitation. In fact, during the trial he disassociated himself completely from the rest of the accused and enjoyed a special position. Since then he has avowedly become a royal Prussian democrat, has come out in favour of the monarchy, etc. So, politically we have no connections whatever with the man, which would not, of course, preclude my being on a personally friendly footing with him until such time as we came into direct political conflict with his people. He will do well enough for the present Prussian Chamber.

I believe that, when I was in Barmen,354 I mentioned to you a little Danish folk-song I had discovered in the Kjämpeviser and had translated into German verse specially for your benefit.430 I enclose it. Unfortunately, I wasn't able to do anything like justice to the lively, defiantly cheerful tone of the original—it's the liveliest I know. However, you'll have to content yourself with the translation (almost literal, by the way). I don't think the thing has been translated into German before.

Please*" convey my compliments and good wishes to your wife.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in the Deutsche Zeitung, No. 473, 16 October 1920

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a H. Becker, Meine Candidatur zum Abgeordnetenhause (Wahlkampf am 6. Dezbr. 1861), Dortmund, 1862.



