---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "225. Marx to Engels. 11 July "
Page_Range: "420-421"
---

# 225. Marx to Engels. 11 July 

Herewith 1 Press* and two very clever 'talks' by Lassalle.b

The enclosed letter from- Lassalle was brought me by the Austrian 'Captain (retd.)' Schweigen, a worthy, stupid fellow. The joke is that Riistow—with the added support of 2 Rüstow brothers—has proposed or is proposing so to use the National Association,24 the Gymnastic Association, etc., as to have, at the crucial moment—in the smaller German states, at least—a ready-made militia commanded by Mr Rüstow to pit against the army. It's a damn silly plan. And, on top of that, the money for it is to come from London! I don't believe Lassalle shares these DELUSIONS. AIL he wants is to make himself seem important in the eyes of Schweigert, etc.

I hope that yoi\, at any rate, will come to London IN THE COURSE OF THE SEASON. Little Jenny is no longer unwell, but has grown more delicate than her constitution warrants. Whatever happens, by the by, we must manage to arrange sea-bathing for her.

Is Lupus in Germany by now?497

What is the position with regard to the 'ASSOCIATES' of the BRITISH ASSOCIATION?353 Are the old cards still valid? Lupus has got mine.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

225

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 11 July [1862]

Dear Engels,

Lassalle has been here for the past 2 days and proposes to stay for several weeks. Now, you really ought to come down for a few days, seeing that he is in any case much 'OFFENDED' by the failure on

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , , . , , . „ , . , r 19.13 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a The Free Press. See this volume, p. 362. - b Ueber Verfassungswesen and Die

[^4]: Philosophie Fichte's und die Bedeutung des Deutschen Volksgeistes, Berlin, 1862.



