---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "227. Engel s to Ferdinand Lassalle. 23 July "
Page_Range: "422-423"
---

# 227. Engel s to Ferdinand Lassalle. 23 July 



**[p. 227]**

ENGELS TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN LONDON

Manchester, 23 July 1862

Dear Lassalle,

I should have written to you long since and thanked you for the many packages you have been kind enough to send me. I resolved to do so often enough over the past 18 months, but have been so taken up with doux commerce* that my private correspondence with all and sundry is badly in arrears. Now I hear you are in London and I would have liked to have come down last Saturday, but simply could not get away. I presently cherish a similar plan in respect of Fridayb evening, but cannot yet say for certain whether I shall be able to carry it out. If at all possible, it shall be done, in which case I shall telegraph Marx at midday on Friday. But if it proves impossible, why shouldn't you come up here on Friday evening or Saturday morning and spend a few days taking a look at the home of cotton? Then we could also slip over to Liverpool which is well worth the trouble, especially since you are concerning yourself with political economy. There's a room in my lodgings at your disposal. It only takes you 5 1/2 hours to get here.

So, think the matter over and, if I should be unable to take Saturday off, you can decide on the spur of the moment, leave London at 9 o'clock on Saturday morning, and be here by 2.45. We shall then be able to discuss everything else by word of mouth—either here or there.

In the meantime, cordial regards from

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a gentle commerce - b 25 July



