---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "230. Engels to Marx. 31 July "
Page_Range: "428-429"
---

# 230. Engels to Marx. 31 July 

the Jews send emissaries to solicit the help of Greece on grounds of kinship. Furthermore, an Etruscan inscription has been found in Perugia, and this was simultaneously deciphered by Hofrat Stücker in Berlin and an Italian, and both independently converted the Etruscan into the Hebrew alphabet.

So that we can no longer discomfit him with 'BLUE BOOKS',443 he has bought 20 pounds' worth of BLUE BOOKS (under Bucher's guidance).

He has converted Bücher to socialism, or so he maintains. Now Bucher's quite a fine little man, if a cranky one, and, in any case, I can't believe that he has accepted Lassalle's 'foreign policy'. Bücher is the 'compositress' in Julian Schmidt.444

If you'd been here just for a day or two, you'd have been able to lay in enough material to keep you laughing for a whole year. That's why I was so anxious to have you here. One doesn't get an opportunity like that every day.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

230

ENGELS T O MARX

[Manchester, 31 July 1862]

Dear Moor,

No doubt you will understand that, after the heavy outgoings last month, it will be impossible for me to get hold of £25 for you just now. I have postponed till August all heavy outgoings on my own account (LANDLADY and quarterly account), moreover, because of the bill, I have had to give Borkheim an order, which will similarly have to be met in August. I shall see what can be done before tomorrow. I still owe Lupus £10, and he will ask for it immediately on his return,445 which might be any day now. If you

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a The Bible (The Old Testament)



