---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "231. Engel s to Marx. 1 August "
Page_Range: "429-431"
---

# 231. Engel s to Marx. 1 August 



**[p. 392]**

If only I knew what the balance looked like and how I stand! But the day after tomorrow Charles3 leaves for Warsaw, where we have incurred a bad debt, and then the whole caboodle will come to a dead stop again.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, _ , ,. , , . _ ,. , r , ,. .„,„ Published in English tor the first time

231

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 1 August 1862

Dear Moor,

The enclosed £10 is all I am able to send you today. This is how things stand: Last month's outgoings: a quarter's stabling for my horse £15, LANDLADY £25 (old Hill agreed to debit this to July because I paid it yesterday), to Borkheim £50, to you £10, total £100. Still outstanding this month: to Lupus £10, Borkheim—for the order—£15, bookseller about £10 (carried over from 1861), in addition, petty expenses: tailor, shoemaker, shirts, and such like, cigars some £25 and the above-mentioned £10, in all £70, or £170 in two months, excluding CURRENT EXPENSES. So, you can see how I stand. On top of that, I am pretty well positive that I exceeded my income in the last financial year and that my income for this one will be very poor. I dare say you might succeed in staving the people off a bit longer, something that can't be done in the case of my creditors since the people here have a habit of descending on one at the office and demanding settlement so that, after the 2nd or 3rd CALLING, one is morally obliged to pay them.

[^1]: a Roesgen



The stories about Lassalle are exceedingly funny. His strategical plan3 is the finest I have ever come across. That Rüstow should have approved it is quite possible. The chap's as vain as Izzy and well on the way to being just as crazy. Cf. his maunderings about the campaign of 1860 in Vol. II of the Demokratische Studien!'

The author' of the Europäische Pentarchie has unloosed a new opus, Europa's Cabinette und Allianzen. And a superb jackass the Russians have bought themselves, too. Never before have I come across anything so stupid and muddle-headed. When he theorises about international law, the fellow's really choice for he puts forward 3 or 4 different theories that are mutually exclusive. Added to which, Christianity à outrance? and flattery of all things Russian laid on so crassly that one can't help laughing out loud at the thought of the money the Russians have chucked away on him. It redounds to Germany's credit that they shouldn't have been able to buy a single fellow worth his salt to write in favour of Russia" and, when they chance to nab one, such as B. Bauer, that he should instantly turn into a dolt.446 His master-plan envisages a Russo-French alliance, Prussia at the head of Little Germany,24

Austria, her capital removed to Budapest, to get the Danubian principalities and all the territory north of*' the Balkans—this spread out like an old cowpat over 300 pages of the most dreary twaddle. If you'd like to have the thing, I'll send it you.

Your

F. E.

O/D 13134 Manchester 27, Jan. 1862—£5 O/D 24296 Manchester 27, Jan. 1862—£5

£10

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 389-90. - b F. W. Rüstow, 'Die Brigade Milano', Demokratische Studien, Hamburg, 1861. - t: Goldmann - d in excess - c Germany in the original



