---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "235. Mar x to Engels. 9 August "
Page_Range: "440-441"
---

# 235. Mar x to Engels. 9 August 



**[p. 235]**

MARX TO ENGELS'69

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 August 1862

Dear Engels,

Izzy doesn't want to pay the £15 before 1 January.'' So, I've been to see Borkheim. You are to draw 400 talers on Lassalle (I didn't, of course, in speaking of Lassalle to Borkheim, say anything AS TO THE £15 to be paid by Lassalle). At 3 months. Then, however, the thing will have to be renewed, as I told Borkheim that it wasn't payable until 1 January. (This being the date stipulated by Lassalle.)

So, the main thing is that you should send Borkheim the bill. As regards the theory of rent, I shall, of course, have to wait until I get your letter.b But what follows will simplify the 'debate', as Heinrich Bürgers would say:

I. All I have to prove theoretically is the possibility of absolute rent, without infringing the law of value. This is the point round which the theoretical controversy has revolved from the time of the physiocrats4r>1 until the present day. Ricardo denies that possibility; I maintain it. I likewise maintain that his denial rests on a theoretically false dogma deriving from A. Smith—the supposed identity of COST I-KICFS' and Y.M.VES OF COMMOMFIFS. Further, that where Ricardo illustrates the thing with examples, he invariably presup- poses conditions in which there is either no capitalist production or (factually or legally) no landed property. But the whole point is to examine the law precisely when such things do exist.

II. As regards the existence of absolute rent, this would be a question that would require statistical solution in any country. But the importance of a purely theoretical solution may be gauged from the fact that for 35 years statisticians and practical men generally have been maintaining the existence of absolute rent, while the (Ricardian) theoreticians have been seeking to explain it away by dint of very forced and theoretically feeble abstractions. Hitherto, I have invariably found that, in all such QUARRELS, the theoreticians have always been in the wrong.

[^1]: •' Sec this volume, p. 401. - '• ibid., pp. 394-98; 402. - c ibid., pp. 396-97.



