---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "236. Engels to Marx. Before 12 August "
Page_Range: "441-442"
---

# 236. Engels to Marx. Before 12 August 

III. I demonstrate that, even presupposing the existence of absolute rent, it by no means follows that the worst cultivated land or the worst mine pays rent UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES; rather, these will, in all likelihood, have to sell their products at market value, but at less than their individual value. In order to prove the opposite, Ricardo invariably supposes—which is theoretically false—that, UNDER ALL CONDITIONS OF THE MARKET, it is the commodity produced in the most unfavourable circumstances which determines the market value. You yourself had already put forward the correct argument against this in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher. *

That is all I have to add as to rent. As regards Brockhaus, Lassalle has promised to do his utmostb

and I believe he will, having solemnly declared that he can neither publish his magnum opus on political economy, nor set to work on it—which in his case amounts to the same thing—until my book310 has come out.

Salut. Your

K. M. Borkheim further adds: You are to draw the 400 talers on Lassalle at 3 months and renew it a fortnight before due date, till 1 January 1863. If you can't manage to pay in instalments, Borkheim will see to it that Lassalle gets the money on the first due date.

As for the Evening Post,' I should be glad if you could draft a letter for me, since I'm very bad at writing colloquial English.

236

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester, before 12 August 1862]

Herewith the bill on Baron Artful.d You must advise him of it, date, day when due, etc., also that he will receive the money on

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart,

[^2]: jqj3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a F. Engels, 'Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy' (present edition, Vol. 3). - b See this volume, p. 402. - ' ibid., p. 394. - d Ferdinand Lassalle



