---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "239. Mar x to Ferdinand Lassalle. 14 August "
Page_Range: "443-444"
---

# 239. Mar x to Ferdinand Lassalle. 14 August 

All you have to do for the time being is to accept the bill drawn by Engels. ALTOGETHER, this amounts to £60 and hence doesn't help me. But, at any rate, the present crisis will be averted and some way out may be found in the mean time.

I am literally on tenterhooks and my work has been VERY MUCH TROUBLED and disrupted.

There is some prospect of my getting another Yankee paper.b

Where are you? What are you up to? What's your old manc up to? Salut from myself and FAMILY.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart- Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

239

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

London, 14 August 1862

Dear Lassalle,

Yesterday, I sent off a couple of lines to you in Berlin. Today I hear that you are at Wildbad. Hence I shall, in a few words, repeat the brief purport of the brief lines which may, perhaps, not reach you.

In order to stave off the catastrophe threatening my affairs, Engels drew a bill on you for £60 (400 talers) through Borkheim on 12 Aug. Due at 3 months date from 12 Aug. Borkheim is to discount this bill for me here. Engels will remit you the covering

[^1]: IN WILDBAD

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 404, 405 and next letter. - b The Evening Post (see ibid., pp. 394 and 404). - c Heimann Lassai, Ferdinand Lassalle's father.



