---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "240. Mar x to Engels. 14 August "
Page_Range: "444-445"
---

# 240. Mar x to Engels. 14 August 



**[p. I]**

amount before due date. (Then he will renew the same bill u p to 1 January 1863, when he will send you a further remittance of £ 4 5 and you will pay £ 1 5 , as you offered to do.) T h e only essential thing now is to have your acceptance. Borkheim sent the bill straight off to Berlin, whence it will return probably before the end of this week or early in the next. T h e n it will at once be sent to you for acceptance. should be very glad if you could telegraph S. L. Borkheim, 27 Crutched Friars, London, saying: 'I SHALL ACCEPT MR F. ENGELS' BILL OF £60.' Namely, so that Borkheim should not raise any further difficulties about the DISCOUNT. In my case, there is greater periculum in mora'1 than I can say. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassatle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. Ill, Stuttgart- Berlin 1992 Published in English for the first time

240

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 14 August 1862

Dear Frederick,

Just a few lines as I have a mass of business errands to r u n today.

T h e misunderstanding consists solely in there 'not having been one'.

Before writing to you, I had told Borkheim that I did not know whether Lassalle was in Berlin, and hence that there was n o certainty of an immediate acceptance. Borkheim had, nevertheless, promised to DISCOUNT the moment he had your signature. H e subsequently thought better of it.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: H e decided, not to DISCOUNT in person, as he had originally intended, BUT TO HAVE THE BILL DISCOUNTED BY ONE OF HIS FRIENDS CONNECTED WITH BERLIN.

[^3]: * danger in delay



