---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "248. Marx to Engels. 10 September "
Page_Range: "452-454"
---

# 248. Marx to Engels. 10 September 



**[p. 415]**

of ground; on the other hand, however, they have speeded up the unification and concentration of the entire Federal army before Washington. The next STEAMER will most probably bring us news of fresh engagements, in which the Federals might well be victorious if their generals weren't so bloody stupid. But what can you expect of such rapscallions! Pope is the lousiest of the lot; all he can do is brag, countermand, lie, and keep quiet about his reverses. Indeed, that know-all of the General Staff, Mc Clellan, now strikes one yet again as being positively intelligent. What is more, the order that all future major-generals are to sit the exam for the Prussian ensign's sword-knot.459 It's too pitiful and, in contrast to the spineless goings-on in the North, the chaps in the South, who,' at least, know what they want, seem to me like heroes. Or do you still believe that the gentlemen of the North will suppress the

'REBELLION'? Adieu!

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . m i s Published in English in lull tor the first time

248

London, 10 September [1862]

Dear Engels,

My FAMILY has got back from Ramsgate; little Jenny is very much better.

Lassalle's letter, containing a letter for Meyer Brothers with whom the bill is lodged in Berlin, and also his acceptance, didn't arrive till yesterday. In the meantime, Borkheim had already gone away on holiday. Up till now he has paid £40 in driblets, the last 15 of the 40 thirteen days ago, when I was leaving?60 For I wanted to pester my uncle." But he, too, was travelling on the Continent.

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS249

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: Lion Philips





**[p. 416]**

From there (passant par COLOGNE., etc.) I went to Trier to see my mater—fruitlessly, however, as I at once suspected when Monsieur l'oncle was not to be got hold of. On the 17th of this month, I have to pay a bill [of exchange] for £ 6 (six POUNDS) to my butcher, and Borkheim won't have got back by then, his intention being to spend ABOUT 4 WEEKS bustling round Switzerland, etc.

As to the YANKEES,312 I am firmly of the opinion, now as before, that the North will win in the end"; true, the Civil War may pass through all kinds of episodes, perhaps even ceasefires, and be long-drawn-out. T h e South would or could conclude peace only on condition that it gained possession of the BORDER SLAVE STATES.'' In that case, California would also fall to it, the North-West would follow suit and the entire Federation, with the exception, perhaps, of the NEW ENGLAND STATES,44" would again form one country, this time under the ACKNOWLEDGED SUPREMACY OF THE SLAVEHOLDERS. It would be the reconstruction of the UNITED STATES on the basis demanded by the South. But that is impossible and won't happen.

T h e North, for its part, can conclude peace only if the CONFEDERACY is restricted to the old slave states, and then only to those bounded by the Mississippi RIVER and the ATLANTIC. In which case the CONFEDERACY would soon come to a happy end. In the intervening period, ceasefires, etc., on the basis of a status quo could at most occasion pauses in the course of the war.

T h e way in which the North \s waging the war is none other than might be expected of a bourgeois republic, where humbug has reigned supreme for so long. T h e South, an oligarchy, is better suited to the purpose, especially an oligarchy where all productive labour devolves on the NIGGERS and where the 4 million 'WHITE TRASH'418 are flibustiers^ by calling. For all that, I'm prepared to bet my life on it that these fellows will come off worst, 'STONEWALL Jackson' notwithstanding. It is, of course, possible that some sort of revolution will occur beforehand in the North itself.

Willich is a brigadier-general and Stephens,'1 or so Kapp told me in Cologne, is also said to be on his way to the wars now.

As to the economic stuff, I don't propose to burden you with it on your journev.''

Salut. ,, Your

K. M.

[^1]: It strikes me that you allow yourself to be influenced by the military ASPECT of things A LITTLE TOO MUCH.

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 400, 415. - h ibid., p. 277. - ' filibusters - ll Wilhelm Steffen - c See this volume, p. 414.



