---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "250. Engels to Marx. 16 October "
Page_Range: "455-456"
---

# 250. Engels to Marx. 16 October 



**[p. 250]**

ENGELS TO MARX249

IN LONDON

Manchester, 16 October 1862

Dear Moor,

Every single day throughout the whole of last week and this, I was all-set to write to you, but was prevented from doing so by the confounded COTTON business. Ces messieurs" had, of course, done as little work as possible while I was away,457 so that my hands have been completely full.

Lupus asked me to tell you that he got the things all right.h The case is a most amusing one. Those poor, mendacious Prussians! They invariably make fools of themselves the moment they commit something to paper!

I presume you got the £10 note I sent you on the day of my departure? Again I got stuck in Barmen and Engelskirchen for too long, having spent a whole fortnight sauntering along the Moselle, the Rhine, and in Thuringia. I went straight to Trier via Brussels and Luxemburg, and then on foot to Kochern, etc., giving Cologne a complete miss.

Bismarck's appointment was hailed by the bourgeois with peals of laughter.4M The chaps were altogether amazingly confident and in a somewhat daredevil mood. They have at last hooked the worthy William with a financial question and know he's bound to give way to them in the long run; but they take a remarkably idyllic view of the course of events and imagine that, provided they just keep the fellow dangling for a while, he'll come to them of his own accord. They're in for a surprise. At all events, things are bound to come to a head some time in the spring. It's killing, by the by, to see what an inspiring effect a financial question of this kind has on the philistines. Schulze-Delitzsch and co. become positively witty, the only man to remain 'sherioush'r being Virchow; but nay, he is not alone—Heinrich Bürgers, too, conducts himself with fitting dignity in Weimar, where he sounds the trumpet on behalf of the Imperial Constitution of the year dot.464 I .must say that Schulze-Delitzsch, the little provident society

[^1]: '•' These gentlemen - b A reference to Marx's article 'A Note on the Amnesty', see this volume, p. 417. - ' In the original ' "ernscht" ischt der Mann' (instead of 'ernst ist, etc.').



