---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "257. Engels to Marx. 15 November "
Page_Range: "464-466"
---

# 257. Engels to Marx. 15 November 



**[p. 256]**

MARX TO ENGELS239

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 14 November 1862]

Dear Engels,

Since you have just sent money to Eccarius and, on top of that, paid out the large sum for Lassalle's bill,3 you will, of course, be very 'blanc'!' Nevertheless, I must ask you to send me a small sum by Monday,12 for I have to buy coal and 'victuals', which, SINCE the épicierd has been refusing me credit for the past 3 weeks, I must, nevertheless, buy from him cash down until the swine has been paid off, otherwise I shall be prosecuted.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

257

Manchester, 15 November 1862

Dear Moor,

You're right, I am very broke and, like the Prussian govern- ment, intensely preoccupied with 'saving'. In the hope that, by leading a domesticated life in Hyde Road,386 I shall be able to make good the deficiency, I enclose herewith a five-pound note, O/L 28076, Manchester, 28 Jan. '62. At the same time, I am sending you a hamper of wine per Chaplin and Home, containing

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX249

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a See this vo'ume, p. 422.- b broke - c 17 November - d grocer

[^4]: 17—558





**[p. 428]**

I am impatiently awaiting the STEAMER that will bring us news of the New York elections. If the Democrats win in New York State, I shan't know what to make of the Yankees any more.473 That a people placed in a great historical dilemma,and one, in which its very existence is at stake to boot, should turn reactionary en masse and vote for abject surrender after 18 months' fighting, is really beyond my comprehension. Desirable though it may be, on the one hand, that the bourgeois republic should be utterly discredited in America too, so that in future it may never again be preached ON ITS OWN MERirs,but only as a means towards,and a form of transition to, social revolution, it is, nevertheless, annoying that a rotten oligarchy, with a population only half as large, should evince such strength as the great fat, helpless democracy. Should the Democrats win, by the way, it will give the worthy Mc Clellan and the WESTPOINTERS 474 a fine advantage and the show will soon be over. The fellows are capable of concluding peace, should the South agree to rejoin the Union ON CONDITION that the President shall always be a SOUTHERNER and Congress always consist of an equal number of SOUTHERNERS and NORTHERNERS. They are even capable of immediately proclaiming Jefferson Davis President of the UNITED STATES and actually surrendering all the BORDER STATES, if peace is not to be had otherwise. Then it's goodbye to America.

Besides, the only apparent effect of Lincoln's emancipation 4b8 so far is that the North-West has voted Democrat for fear of being overrun by Negroes.

To descend from the sublime to the ridiculous, what do you think of worthy William?3 At last the fellow is himself again; he has expiated his liberal sins and said 'mater peccavi'b to the crippled Elizabeth/ In return for this, the Lord has endowed him with strength wherewith to smite the scrofulous mob of liberals475 and for that, says William, 'for that I need the military'. So rabid is the fellow that even Bismarck is no longer reactionary enough for him. That you're a fool, Schapper, we know and you yourself know, but that you are such a fool, etc., etc. Things are going swimmingly, and what could be better than that, 14 years after 1848, the liberal bourgeoisie should have been landed in the most extreme revolutionary dilemma, and all because of a miserable 6 million talers, or about £850,000 sterling? If only the old jackass

[^1]: a William I - b Mother, I have sinned (paraphrase of pater peccavi, Luke 15:21). - ' 1 he Queen dowager, wife of the late Frederick William IV.



