---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "259. Marx to Engels. 20 November "
Page_Range: "468-469"
---

# 259. Marx to Engels. 20 November 



**[p. 431]**

As TO OUR 'handsome William',a the chap is IN FACT delectable. Bismarck's government, by the by, is nothing more nor less than the Little German progressists' pious wish come true.482 They used to rave about the 'man of progress', Louis Bonaparte. Now they see what having a 'Bonapartist' government in Prussia means. After all, Bismarck was in a sense appointed by Bonaparte (and Russia).

I shall look out the Presses for you. Salut (also to the ladies).

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

259

MARX T O ENGELS 2 4 9

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 20 November 1862

Dear Engels,

I acknowledge, with many thanks and in great haste, receipt of the first half of the ten-pound note.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: If only the Mexicans (les derniers des hommes!)h were once more to beat the crapauds,483 but even in Paris these particular swine—the allegedly radical bourgeois—are now talking of 'l'honneur du drapeau'.c

[^2]: Unless Spence prevails over the NORTHERNERS, nothing will do any good, not even Mc Clellan's BAD GENERALSHIP.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, . iqi Q Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a William I - b the dregs of humanity! - c the honour of the flag



