---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "261. Marx to Engels. 24 December "
Page_Range: "469-471"
---

# 261. Marx to Engels. 24 December 



**[p. 260]**

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH484

IN LONDON

[London,] 15 December 1862 Dear Freiligrath,

The £5 returned herewith 'by hand' with my best thanks. You will excuse its arriving 5 days late. The family in Trier was so taken aback by the sudden and unexpected death of my brother-in-law, R. Schmalhausen, that there was some delay over sending me the money.

I have been spending a few days in Liverpool and Manches- ter,4 5 t h o s e CENTRES Of COTTONOCRACY AND PRO-SLAVERY ENTHUSIASM. A M O N G

THE GREAT BULK OF THE MIDDLE-CLASSES AND THE ARISTOCRACY OF THOSE TOWNS YOU

MAY OBSERVE THE GREATEST ECLIPSUS OF THE HUMAN MIND EVER CHRONICLED IN THE

HISTORY OF MODERN TIMES.

I shall drop in at your OFFICE for a couple of minutes one of these days, since I also have some LITERARY BUSINESS to talk over with you.

One of these days, I shall reply to 'les paroles d'un croyant'.3496

Kindest regards from my family to yours.

Your

K. M.

MARX TO ENGELS239

[London,] 24 December 1862 Dear Engels,

Since leaving you,485 I have had A MOST EVENTFUL TIME OF IT. On Monday,1' there were the Manichaeans487 who, however, did not all come by appointment. I shared out £15 among them. I

[^1]: First published in the supplement to: Printed according to the original Franz Mehring, The Freiligrath-Marx Cor- respondence, Moscow-Leningrad, 1929 (in J ^ f ^ f 1 i n E n S h s h i n f u l 1 f o r t h e

[^2]: Russian) first time

[^3]: 261

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: a words of a believer - b 22 December





**[p. 433]**

gave the worst one a bill for £12 at 6 weeks' sight (actually 7, since 1 dated it from the end of this year), trusting to a CHAPTER OF

ACCIDENTS.

On Wednesday" my wife left for Paris. She returned last night. Everything would have been AI.I RIGHT if, just before she got there, Abarbanel had not been paralysed by a stroke, which left him helpless and confined to bed, although mentally unaffected. All in all, the series of mishaps that befell her was tragi-comical. First, a great storm at sea' her boat got through, another in her immediate vicinity (she travelled via Boulogne) went down. Abarbanel lives outside Paris. My wife went to see him by rail. Something happened to the engine which meant 2 hours delay in the journey. Later, an omnibus in which she was 'ravelling overturned. And yesterday the wheels of the CAB she had taken in London became entangled with those of another. She got out and arrived here per pedes!' accompanied by 2 boys carrying her luggage. One thing, by the by, was achieved in Paris, where she sow Massol, etc.' As soon as my work310 comes out, it will be published in French.

But now for the worst piece of ill-luck. Marianne (Lenchen's sister'1), whom Allen treated fo~ a heart complaint a year ago, be- gan to feel unwell on the day my wife left. By Tuesday evening, 2 hours before my wife's return, she was dead. During those seven days I, together with Lenchen, was responsible for the nursing. Allen HAD MISGIVINGS FROM THE FIRST DAY. The funeral is at 2 o'clock on Saturday,'' when I shall have to pay the UNDERTAKER £7 10/- in cash. So, this must be got hold of. A fine Christmas show for the poor children.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: •' 17 December - b on foot - ' See this volume, p. 439. - d Helene Demuth's step-sister Anna Maria Creuz - e 27 December



