---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "266. Engels to Marx. 7 January "
Page_Range: "478-479"
---

# 266. Engels to Marx. 7 January 



**[p. 1913]**

'Since. the government continues its military expenditure, etc., despite the resolutions of the Chamber, etc., thus belying the existence of a constitutional government, etc., the Chamber will prorogue until such time as the government declares that it will desist from that expenditure'."

Such is the power of 'stating the facts'. To save them work, he has provided the wording of the decree to be promulgated by the Chamber.

Old Heimanb has safely removed to Abraham's bosom. Regards and COMPLIMENTS OF THE SEASON TO THE LADIES.1

Your

K. M.

I see that there's been a fall in cotton prices. In my opinion, however, this is only temporary.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Published in English in full for the III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t i m e

266

Dear Moor,

Maryc is dead. Last night she went to bed early and, when Lizzyf wanted to go to bed shortly before midnight, she found she had already died. Quite suddenly. Heart failure or an apoplectic stroke. I wasn't told till this morning; on Monday evening K she was still quite well. I simply can't convey what I feel. The poor girl loved me with all her heart.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX492

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Manchester, 7 January 1863 d

[^4]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart,

[^5]: a F. Lassallc, Was nun?, pp. 30-31. - b Heimann Lassai, Ferdinand Lassalle's father - c Mary and Lizzy Burns - d Wrong date in the original: '1862'. - e Mary Burns - f Lizzy Burns - s 5 January



