---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "268. Engels to Marx. 13 January "
Page_Range: "480-481"
---

# 268. Engels to Marx. 13 January 



**[p. 443]**

life? You can see what strange notions come into the heads of 'civilised men' under the pressure of certain circumstances.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

What arrangements will you now, make about your ESTABLISHMENT? It's terribly hard for you, since with Mary you had a HOME to which you were at liberty to retreat from the human imbroglio, whenever you chose.493

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

268

ENGELS TO MARX492

IN LONDON

Manchester, 13 January 1863

Dear Marx,

You will find it quite in order that, this time, my own misfortune and the frosty view you took of it should have made it positively impossible for me to reply to you any sooner.

All my friends, including philistine acquaintances, have on this occasion, which in all conscience must needs afflict me deeply, given me proof of greater sympathy and friendship than I could have looked for. You thought it a fit moment to assert the superiority of your 'dispassionate turn of mind'. Soit!*

You know the state of my finances. You also know that I do all I can to drag you out of the mire. But I cannot raise the largish sum of which you speak, as you must also know. Three things can be done:

1. LOAN SOCIETY. To what extent my guarantee would serve here remains to be seen—scarcely at all, no doubt, since I am not a

[^1]: HOUSEHOLDER.

[^2]: a So be it then!



