---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "272. Marx to Engels. 13 February "
Page_Range: "490-491"
---

# 272. Marx to Engels. 13 February 



**[p. 272]**

MARX TO ENGELS369

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 February 1863 Dear Frederick,

I enclose divers Urquhartiana. Of late, the fellows have really distinguished themselves by their stupidity. Take, for example, their 'philosophy' with regard to the movement in the UNITED

STATES. 3 • I'd have written before now, but for some twelve days I've been STRICTLY forbidden all reading, writing, or smoking. I had some kind of inflammation of the eye, combined with a most obnoxious affection of the nerves of the head. Things have improved to such an extent that I am venturing to write again for the first time at this moment. In between whiles I indulged in all manner of psychological fantasies about what it would feel like to be blind or insane.

What do you think of the Polish business?499 This much is certain, the ERA OF REVOLUTION has now FAIRLY OPENED IN EUROPE once more. And the general state of affairs is good. But the comfortable DELUSIONS and almost childish enthusiasm with which we welcomed the revolutionary era before February 1848, have gone by the board. Old comrades such as Weerth, etc., are no more, others have fallen by the wayside or gone to the bad and, if there is new stock, it is, at least, not yet in' evidence. Moreover, we now know what role stupidity plays in revolutions, and how they are exploited by blackguards. Incidentally, the 'Prussian' enthusiasts for the 'Italian' and 'Hungarian' nationalities500 are already finding themselves in a fix. The 'Prussians' are not going to deny their Russian sympathies. This time, let us hope, the lava will flow from East to West and not in the opposite direction, so that we shall be spared the 'honour' of the French initiative. Apart from that, the adventure in Mexico is providing a truly classical epilogue to the farce of the LOWER EMPIRE.501

The 'Herzenian' soldiers502 appear to be setting about things in the traditional manner. However, there's little to be deduced

[^1]: a This presumably refers to the first instalment of the anonymous article 'Origin and Objects of the Treason in the United States', The Free Press, Vol. IX, No. 2, 4 February 1863.



