---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "273. Marx to Engels. 17 February "
Page_Range: "491-492"
---

# 273. Marx to Engels. 17 February 



**[p. 454]**

therefrom, either in respect of the masses in Russia, or EVEN the bulk of the Russian Army. We know what was done by the 'intelligent bayonets' 5 0 3 of the French, not to mention our own Rhineland ruffians in Berlin in 1848. But at present you should WATCH The Bell, for Herzen et cie. now have the chance to demonstrate their revolutionary integrity—in so far as it is compatible with Slav PREDILECTIONS.

T h e Urquhartites will probably say that the Polish insurrection was stirred u p by the St. Petersburg cabinet as a'diversion' from Urquhart's INTENDED INVASION OF THE CAUCASUS.504

In the UNITED STATES things are going damned slowly. I hope that J. Hooker will extricate himself.

Well, make sure you first let me know what you're doing with yourself in Manchester now. It must be a damned lonely place for you. I know from my own experience how the region round Soho Square still sends a shiver down my spine if I happen to be anywhere near there.506

Salut.

Your

K. M.

273

London, 17 February [1863]

Dear Frederick,

this was really done to divert you, and distract you from your misery.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: MARX T O ENGELS 2 4 9

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: I am really worried by your silence. I hope you aren't ill. Conversely, I hope I haven't again given offence malgré moi.* If, in my letter, acknowledging the £100, I discussed machinery, etc.,b

[^5]: a despite myself - b See this volume, pp. 448-52.



