---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "274. Engels to Marx. 17 February "
Page_Range: "492-494"
---

# 274. Engels to Marx. 17 February 



**[p. 455]**

The Polish business and Prussia's intervention507 do indeed represent a combination that impels us to speak. Not in person, partly so as to avoid any appearance of competing with the student Blind,3 partly so as not to deny ourselves entry to Germany. But the Workers' Society here would serve well for the purpose. A manifesto should be issued in its name,308 and issued IMMEDIATELY. You must write the military bit—i.e. on Germany's military and political interest in the restoration of Poland. I shall write the diplomatic bit.

Well, OLD BOY, let me have an answer and, if you've got anything on your mind, SPEAK OUT LIKE AMAN in the assurance that no one takes a warmer interest in your weal and woe than does

Your

Moor

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

274

Manchester, 17 February 1863

Dear Moor,

You must excuse my long silence. I was in a vety forlorn state, and it was high time I extricated myself from it. I tried Slavonic languages but the loneliness was unbearable. I had to force myself to seek distraction. That helped, and I am now my old self again.

The Poles are really splendid fellows. If they manage to hold out until 15 March, there'll be a general conflagration in Russia. At first, I was devilish afraid the business might go wrong. But now there would seem to be almost more chance of victory than of defeat. Nor should it be forgotten that the younger members of the Polish emigration have a military literature of their own in which ail matters are discussed with special reference to Polisii condi-

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX249

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a An allusion to K. Blind's article 'Deutschland und Polen'.



Oddly enough, the only two leaders to have been named so far are Frankowski, a Warsaw Jew, and Langiewicz, a Prussian lieutenant. The Russian messieurs, in view of their ineptitude, are bound to suffer appallingly as a result of guerrilla warfare.

Have you seen that Bakunin and Mierostawski are dubbing one another liars, and are at loggerheads over the Russo-Polish frontiers? I have ordered3 the Kolokol, from which I shall presumably find out more about it.3'0 Incidentally, I shall have to do some hard swotting before I can work my way through it again.

The Prussians are behaving infamously as always.507 Monsieur Bismarck knows that it will be a matter of life and death for him if there's revolution in Poland and Russia. Not that there's any hurry over Prussian intervention. So king as it's not necessary, the Russians won't permit it, and when it does become necessary, the Prussians will take care not to go.

If things go wrong in Poland, then we shall probably face a year or two of acute reaction, for in that case the ripa BOCAa BHwo H,apbb would again become head of a Holy Alliance,511 which last would again cause Monsieur Bonaparte to be looked on as a great liberal and champion of nations by the stupid crapauds? Apropos, how funny it is to see the entire English bourgeoisie pitching into Boustrapa,167 now that Kinglake has made public a small, improperly digested and improperly heard fragment of the same tittle-tattle about him and his LOTd as we've been telling them for ten years without their believing us. Revelations about the court in Paris are again becoming quite the rage and, in the Guardian, Mr Tom Taylor6 is portentously dishing up all that stuff re la Solms, Bonaparte, Wyse, the Jecker affair, etc., that we've long known far more about. There's only one thing of interest, namely that Jecker had already supplied money for the Strasbourg or the Boulogne conspiracy—which, Taylor doesn't know. This, then, accounts for the connection.

Things don't look too good in YANKEELAND. Indeed, by a stroke of irony not uncommon in world history, the Democrats have, in the eyes of the philistines, now become the WAR-PARTY while the

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 454. - b Orthodox Tsar - r French philistines - d A. W. Kinglake's speech in the House of Commons on 12 July 1860, The Times, No. 23671, 13 July I860 (see this volume, pp. 173-74). - e John Eduard Taylor



