---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "276. Marx to Engels. 20 February "
Page_Range: "495-496"
---

# 276. Marx to Engels. 20 February 



**[p. 1913]**

takes will more or less depend on this. Who will print it? And when will your bit be ready lor printing? About machinery a anon.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stutt- sart 1913 Published in English for the first time

276

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,]-20 February 1863

DEAR FREDERICK,

I think our best course re the Polish business would be as follows:

Your

K. M.

[^1]: T h e proclamation for the workingmen, i.e. in the name of the Society,508 should amount to one sheet of print at most, military and political TOGETHER. SO, write that first. I shall then fit mine in. The Society will print this. However, it would also be a good idea for us to deal with the subject in greater detail in a pamphlet, 5 1 2 and there you must determine the number of sheets entirely in accordance with the material. T h e diplomatic bit, which I am READY to do at any time, would in fact only be an appendix. As TO a publisher, I intend to write to Hanover IMMEDIATELY you advise me of the number of sheets.

[^2]: Apropos, send me a power of attorney for Bücher re Duncker, apropos Po and Rhine.h

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 449-51. - b F. Engels, Po and Rhine.



