---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "277. Engels to Marx. About 21 February "
Page_Range: "496-497"
---

# 277. Engels to Marx. About 21 February 



**[p. 277]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, about 21 February 1863]

Dear Moor,

I shall send you the stuff for the manifesto"—quite brief—, but it is pretty sure to contain a good deal that partly encroaches on your province—you will have to deal with this.

Ad vocemb pamphlet: I thought of dividing the thing up as follows: 1. Russia's military position vis-à-vis the West and South before, 2. ditto after, the 3 partitions of Poland, 3. ditto after 1814,51S 4. the attitude of Russia and Germany after the restora- tion of Poland. (Something will have to be said here about Prussian Poland, linguistic boundaries, and the statistical propor- tions of the mixed population.) All in all, at most 3-4 sheets; title: Germany and Poland. Political-Military Considerations on the Occasion of the Polish Uprising of 1863.512 It would then be up to you to go over your notes in the meantime and prepare them to the extent of being able, immediately on receipt of the ms., either to fit them in at the appropriate places or include them as an appendix and refer to them as necessary. If you have any further observations to make about this, write and tell me as soon as possible so that I can bear them in mind.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stutt rt ]9J3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: 11 See this volume, p. 458. - b Re

[^3]: 18—558



