---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "281. Marx to Engels. 9 April "
Page_Range: "503-506"
---

# 281. Marx to Engels. 9 April 



**[p. 466]**

the little blackguard in the arse. I was so annoyed that I got tight and while still in a state of tightness wrote you a furious letter232

on the subject, which doubtless contained some pretty splendid stuff, for I have absolutely no recollection of what I wrote. I merely mention the matter how, so that you can view it in its proper context.

Vale.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

281

MARX TO ENGELS369

IN MANCHESTER

London, 9 April 1863

Dear Frederick,

Little Tussy was delighted with the letter and its contents and cannot be dissuaded from replying in 'person'.

I have known all about Mieroslawski's Plonplonism524 for years now through J. Ph. Becker and Schily. Anyway, I had deduced it even earlier from a book he published during the last Russo- Turkish war.3 One of the things the magnanimous fellow proposed therein was the partition of Germany into 2 countries. But I've never heard anything of the kind in connection with Koscielski. As for M.'s ludicrous vanity and boundless credulity the minute his vanity is tickled, Becker sent me a highly comical account of it from Italy in 1860.

Izzy has already brought out 2 more pamphlets about his trialb;

[^1]: a L. Mierostawski, De la nationalité polonaise dans l'équilibre européen, Paris, 1856. - b F. Lassalle, Der Lassallesche Criminalprozess, Zurich, 1863; Das Criminal- Urtheil wider mich mit kritischen Randnoten zum Zweck der Appellationsrechtfertigung [Leipzig, 1863].





**[p. 467]**

luckily he has not sent them to me. On the other hand, the day before yesterday I received his open reply to the central working men's committee for the Leipzig working men's (read louts') congress.325 He gives himself all the airs of a future working men's dictator—self-importantly dispensing the phrases he has borrowed from us. He solves the wages v. capital problem 'with delightful ease' (verbotenusd). The workers, that is, are to agitate for general suffrage, after which they are to send people like himself into the Chamber of Deputies, armed 'with the naked sword of science'. Next they organise workers' factories, for which the state advances the capital and, BY AND BY, these institutions spread throughout the country. This, at any rate, is surprisingly new! Let me quote a sentence for you:

'If, today, a German labour movement is already discussing the question as to whether the association should be conceived in the light of his' (Schulze-Delitzsch's) 'ideas or of mine, the merit is largely his; and that is where his true merit lies—a merit which cannot be esteemed too highly The cordiality with which I acknowledge that merit should not prevent us, etc'

Ça irah\ At the very time when Palmerston was in Glasgow, another great man announced his coming, the student Karl Blind. Prior to his arrival, he sent an item to the Glasgow North British Mail under the heading 'M. Karl Blind', beneath which the paper had inserted the ominous word 'COMMUNICATED'.

This remarkable communique—written by himself, like all the items about him circulating in the press, and inserted in the paper by that jackass Mc Adam—opens with the following unique introduction:

[^1]: *'At the present moment when a patriot exile is about to visit Glasgow, for the purpose of bringing under public notice the merits of the Polish question, it is fitting that a few remarks should be made upon his political career, and more especially so from the unfortunate fact that he is comparatively unknown in Scotland. German by birth and German by exile, Mr Karl Blind's efforts have not come so prominently and so persistently before Europe as to have gained for him universal admiration from the liberating party, or universal execration from the oppressing party. He has hitherto stood in that middle way, where he has the honour of being both beloved and hated; but in these two contending ranks which have rendered to him their tribute after its kind the whole of Europe is not ranged, Mr Karl Blind having the satisfaction of knowing there is a third section of his friends who are simply indifferent. He therefore comes before the

[^2]: a literally - b Here: It will go. Ça ira—is the refrain of a popular song of the French Revolution.





**[p. 468]**

Scottish public with perhaps less prejudice against him than has been the case with most of the distinguished exiles who preceded him'.*a

There follows a short biographical note on the GREAT UNKNOWN in which Scotland and THE THIRD SECTION' OF MANKIND are informed that the said 'MR KARL BLIND' IS A NATIVE OF BADEN, AND WAS ORIGINALLY, LIKE

KOSSUTH AND MAZZIN1, TRAINED TO THE LAW. T h a t t h e ' B A D I S H REVOLUTION' W a S

THE RESULT OF HIS PROPAGANDISE, t h a t t h e 'GOVERNMENTS OF B A D E N AND THE PALATINATE' had sent him to Paris in J u n e 'IN THE CAPACITY OF DIPLOMATIC: ENVOY', etc., and that he acts 'IN THAT SPIRIT OF COOPERATION WHICH SO

DISTINGUISHES THE MORE CELEBRATED EXILES:'

Isn't that 'naice'b? My wife has now been confined to bed for a fortnight and has gone almost completely deaf, heaven knows why. Little Jenny has had another attack of diphtheria of some sort. If you could send me some wine for both of them (Allen wants little Jenny to have port), I'd be most grateful.

Here in London a parson (as distinct from the atheists who preach in John Street) has been giving deistic sermons for the public, in which he makes Voltairian fun of the Bible. (My wife and children went to hear him twice and thought highly of him as a humorist).

How soon the English workers will throw off what seems to be a bourgeois contagion remains to be seen. So far as the main theses in your book' are concerned, by the by, they have been corroborated down to the very last detail by developments subsequent to 1844. For I have again been comparing the book with the notes I made on the ensuing period. Only your small-minded German philistine who measures world history by the ell and by what he happens to think are 'interesting news items', could regard 20 years as more than a day where major developments of this kind are concerned, though these may be again succeeded by days into which 20 vears are compressed.

[^1]: I attended a TRADE UNIONS meeting chaired by Bright.y2b H e had very much the air of an INDEPENDENT D'1 and, whenever he said 'IN THE

[^2]: UNITED STATES NO KINGS, NO BISHOPS', t h e r e was a BURST OF APPLAUSE. T h e working men themselves spoke very well indeed, without a trace of bourgeois rhetoric or the faintest attempt to conceal their opposition to the capitalists (who, by the by, were also attacked by papa Bright).

[^3]: » 'M. Karl Blind', North British Daily Mail 30 March 1863. - b In the original: 'scheen' (instead of 'schön'). - c See this volume, p. 465.



