---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "282. Marx to Engels. 18 April "
Page_Range: "506-507"
---

# 282. Marx to Engels. 18 April 

Re-reading your work has made me unhappily aware of the changes wrought by age. With what zest and passion, what boldness of vision and absence of all learned or scientific reservations, the subject is still attacked in these pages! And then, the very illusion that, tomorrow or the day after, the result will actually spring to life as history lends the whole thing a warmth, vitality, and humour with which the later 'grey on grey' contrasts damned unfavourably.

Salut.

Your

K. M. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

282

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 18 April 1863

Dear Engels,

Lassalle sent me the enclosed piece of nonsense marked in red (the newspaper is that of E. Meyen528) a week ago today; so, it arrived just one day after I had written you the letter in which I gave you a short excerpt from Izzy's latest pamphlet." He now clearly expects me to enter the lists on his behalf. Que faire?h

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: 11 See this volume, p. 467. - b What should I do?



