---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "285. Engels to Marx. 20 May "
Page_Range: "509-511"
---

# 285. Engels to Marx. 20 May 



**[p. 284]**

MARX T O JOSEF VALENTIN WEBER

IN LONDON

[London,] 22 April 1863 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Weber,

Will you stand surety for me with a LOAN SOCIETY (for £ 1 5 to £30)?

I would not have troubled you with this request if

1. the matter were not an entirely formal one, entailing no risk to yourself, for I shall be getting £200 from home at the beginning of July;

2. Pfänder, who would otherwise have been my second surety, had not unexpectedly had to go to Manchester for several weeks.

In addition to other cases of illness in my family, I myself have been suffering from my periodic liver complaint for many weeks now and have thus been literally incapable of writing a single line. Hence the delay over the work for the Society3 which was more disagreeable for me, of course, than for the Society itself.

Salut. Your

K. M.

285

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 20 May 1863

[^1]: First published in Neues Deutschland, Printed according to the original No. 15, 15 January 1963

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: Moro viejo, Mora viejo, EI de la vellida barbae What's the matter with you, no longer sending word of your fortunes and rebus gestisc? Are you ill or stuck fast in the depths of

[^5]: a See this volume, p. 455.- b Old Moor, Old Moor, / He of the hoary beard. - c activities





**[p. 473]**

political economy? Or have you appointed little Tussy your correspondence secretary? OR HOW?

What do you think of the worthies in Berlin who have come to the conclusion that it is questionable whether their president is permitted to call a minister to order, should the minister say that, for all he cared, the whole Chamber could be triple damned, etc.511 Never has a parliament clung more patiently and more inopportunely to the thesis that the bourgeois opposition, in its struggle with absolutism and the Junker camarilla, is under an obligation to let itself be kicked. It's our old friends of 1848 all over again. However, on this occasion times are somewhat different.

Lassalle's goings-on and the rumpus they have created in Germany are really becoming obnoxious.332 It's high time you finished your book310; if only to provide us with propagandists of a different kind. In other respects, it's quite a good thing that an audience for anti-bourgeois stuff should be recaptured in this way, though it's disastrous that friend Izzy should thereby carve out a position for himself. However, that's something we have never been able to prevent, any more than the heroic swordsman's postures assumed in public by Karl Blind vis-à-vis the Grand Duke of Baden.a

By the way, if you want to see how much time it takes before new scientific discoveries, even in wholly unpolitical fields, make any headway, you should read Lyell's Antiquity of Man. Schmerling in Liege had discovered the fossilised human skull from Engis and shown it to Lyell as far back as 1834,b when he also brought out his thick book.' Nevertheless, it was only quite recently that anyone thought the thing worthy of serious investigation. Similarly, Perthes'1 in Abbeville had correctly identified the flint instruments in the Somme basin and their geological age as early as 1842, but it was not until the end of the fifties that the thing was noticed. Such are those scoundrels, the patriarchs of science.

Lupus has again suffered severe attacks of gout but is better now.

I am also working hard at Serbian and the ballads collected by Vuck Stef. Karadzic.e It comes more easily to me than any other Slavonic language.

[^1]: •' Frederick I - b In the original: '1843'. - C.P. C. Schmerling, Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles découverts dans les cavernes de la province de Liège, V. I-II, Liège, 1833-1834. - ll Boucher de Crèvecoeur de Perthes. - e [Karadzic V. S.] B. Or. Kapaynti, Hapoàne cpncxe njec Me. KH. I-IV. y Ann Hcir H H y Eeiy. 1823-1833.



