---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "290. Marx to Engels. 22 June "
Page_Range: "518-519"
---

# 290. Marx to Engels. 22 June 



**[p. 481]**

Hence, so as not to compromise 'communism' in any way or injure him, I had ignored him completely.

Come to that, the chap is making all this hullabaloo out of sheer vanity. Throughout 1859 he was heart and soul for the Prussian liberal bourgeois party. Now he may find it more convenient to attack the 'bourgeois' under the AUSPICES OF THE GOVERNMENT than to attack the 'Russians'. To rail against the Austrians and adulate the Italians has always been as typical of your Berliner as to keep one's trap shut about the Russians, which is what the valiant lad does.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

290

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 22 June 1863

Dear Engels,

The 'little man" writes to me today from Liverpool saying that the business of the moneyb has got to be settled, i.e. decided, now, since he must attend to it in person and may have to leave on business any day. Believe me, I find it highly disagreeable that you should assume ANY OBLIGATION WHATEVER towards the little man on my behalf. Mais que faire?c

I have been going to the British Museum and shall continue to do so until the end of this month since, if only for the sake of my liver, I must do all I can to elude the nagging at home that is the inevitable consequence of PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT. As soon as peace is restored, I shall devote myself to the fair copy of the beastly book, which I intend to hawk round Germany myself.d Once that is

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Ernst Dronke - b See this volume, pp. 465-66, 476.- c But what can one do? - d See this volume, pp. 435-36, 474.



