---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "291. Engels to Marx. 24 June "
Page_Range: "519-520"
---

# 291. Engels to Marx. 24 June 



**[p. 482]**

done, then will be the time to get a French translation under way in Paris and cast round in London with a view to an English rendering. For, on this occasion, if only because of Izzy, it's imperative that we don't hide too much of our light under a bushel.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, into Published in English for the first time

291

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 24 June 1863

Dear Moor,

I have absolutely no idea what the little BUSYBODY" wants. Why doesn't he write and tell me that he wants the matter settled now? He wrote and told me that, if I didn't reply, he would draw on me as arranged. So far as I'm concerned, if a matter is settled, it's settled and I therefore thought it totally unnecessary to send him another written assurance a fortnight before the date stating that I would do what I had already undertaken to do, both verbally and in writing. Basing myself on your letter, which casts quite a different light on his motives, I have now written to him as requested.232 My acceptance will be for £250. Make sure he sends you the whole amount, since he has undertaken to pay the expenses and interest himself.

Have finished Kinglake.b Never before has there been anything as superficial (though some of the material is very good, if scrappy), stupid and ignorant as his Battle of the Alma. Only la part des français' is well and accurately depicted—in general, at least. Otherwise, much that is highly amusing to the military reader.d

[^1]: •' Ernst Dronke - b A. W. Kinglake, The Invasion of the Crimea. - c the part played by the French - d Engels discussed the book in 'Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma' (see present edition, Vol. 19).



