---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "295. Engels to Marx. 24 November , "
Page_Range: "530-532"
---

# 295. Engels to Marx. 24 November , 



**[p. 493]**

His aim now is to raise a German legion in London, even if only 200 strong, so that he can confront the Russians in Poland with the black, red and gold flag,170 partly to 'exasperate' the Parisians, partly to see whether there is any possibility whatsoever of bringing the Germans in Germany back to their senses.

What's lacking is money. Efforts are being made down here to exploit all the German societies, etc., to this end. You must be the best judge of whether anything can be done in this LINE in Manchester. The cause as such would appear to be excellent.

Give my regards to Lupus and tell him that I've sent on his letter to Eccarius.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 t l m e

295

Manchester, 24 November 1863

Dear Moor,

As I have heard nothing more from your wife, I can only hope your health has improved in the meantime, and that you are rid of your boils. The main thing is to stick to wine-drinking and meat-eating. During the past few days my evenings at the office—the only time I can contemplate writing private letters— have been much interrupted, otherwise you'd have heard from me before.

Things are getting critical in Germany. In one way, the Danish business557 has come at the wrong time, while, in another, it can only precipitate the crisis. Funny, how the English press is

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX237

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: 20*





**[p. 494]**

Again, it's really rather funny that the whole question of the succession should now turn on whether the Augustenburg fellow, as the child of a morganatic marriage, is qualified to succeed.338

In Prussia, Bismarck's insolence would seem to be wavering a bit after all. The disavowal of the Landrat election intrigues, and the repeal of the Press Decree are significant omens.539 J'espère qu'ils ne reculent que pour mieux sauter}1 Lassalle, too, is playing a part in the press controversy. Wagener was tactless enough (vis-à-vis his tacit ally, Lassalle) to cite his opinion of the liberal press0 in justification of the Press Decree.d This evoked roars of laughter and bad jokes from Virchow and Gneist. Lassalle has made a thorough mess of his campaign, which won't, of course, prevent him from beginning all over again. Yet the jackass could have found out perfectly well from the Manifesto" what attitude one ought to adopt towards the bourgeoisie at times such as these.

Many regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jg]3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a Presumably Palmerston. - b I hope they are only withdrawing, the better to advance. - c This refers to Lassalle's pamphlet, Die Feste, die Presse und der Frankfurter Abgeordnetentag. Drei Symptome des offentliehen Geistes. Düsseldorf, 1863.- d Wagener's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 19 November 1863, Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 326, 22 November 1863. - e K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party.



