---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "297. Engels to Marx. 3 December "
Page_Range: "532-534"
---

# 297. Engels to Marx. 3 December 



**[p. 296]**

MARX TO ENGELS239

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 December 1863

DEAR FREDERICK,

Two hours ago a telegram arrived, saying my mothera was dead. Fate laid claim to one of our family. I myself have already had one foot in the grave. Circumstances being what they were, I, presumably, was needed more than my mater.

I have got to go to Trier to settle the question of the legacy. Was in much doubt as to what Allen would say, as it is only 3 days since I first began taking a recuperative WALK of half an hour a day.

However, Allen has given me 2 enormous bottles of medicine to take with me and actually thinks it advisable for me to go. The wound hasn't stopped discharging yet, but all along the route I should find good Samaritanessesb to apply the plaster for me.

I must now ask you to send me enough money by return to enable me to leave for Trier forthwith.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

297

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 3 December 1863 Dear Moor,

Herewith U/O 16055 & 56, two fivers, in all £10, dated Manchester, 13 Jan. '63, for your trip to Trier. I trust our

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Henriette Marx - h Cf. Luke 10:33.34.





**[p. 496]**

1. that the Schi.-Holst, theory is a lot of rubbish; 2. that in Holstein the Augustenburg fellow would certainly seem to be in the right558;

3. that in Schleswig it's difficult to say who is entitled to succeed—but the male line, if at all, only as Denmark's vassal;

4. that the London Protocol is certainly valid in Denmark, but is certainly not so in Schleswig and Holstein because the Estates were not consulted;

5. that the German right to Schleswig is confined to the south, which is German by nationality and free choice, so that Schleswig would have to be partitioned;

6. that at present Germany's only chance of liberating the Duchies lies in our starting a war against Russia for the benefit of Poland. Then Louis Napoleon would be our obedient servant, Sweden would instantly throw herself into our arms, and England, hoc est3 Pam, would be hamstrung; then we could take anything we liked from Denmark with impunity.

THEM IS MY SENTIMENTS. I'd like to enlarge upon them in a pamphlet, if you could find a publisher for it in Germany.500

Lupus is better, but still a bit unsteady on his pins. Many regards to the FAMILY. I was damned glad to see your scratchy scrawl again.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Needless to say, I'd put my name to it. Qu'en dis-tu?h

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a in other words - b What do you say to that?



