---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "298. Marx to Engels. 4 December "
Page_Range: "534-535"
---

# 298. Marx to Engels. 4 December 



**[p. 298]**

MARX TO ENGELS67

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 December 1863

Dear Frederick,

Very many thanks for the £10. Ditto, retrospectively, for the port. It has done me a power of good. Besides the wine, I have (up till now) been having to swill f/2 quarts of the strongest London STOUT every day. It struck me as a good theme for a short story. From the front, the man who regales HIS INNER MAN with port, claret, stout and a truly massive mass of meat. From the front, the guzzler. But behind, on his back, the OUTER MAN, a damned carbuncle. If the devil makes a pact with one to sustain one with consistently good fare in circumstances like these, may the devil take the devil, I say. Incidentally, I still feel light-headed and my knees are those of a broken-down hack, but I imagine the journey will put a stop to all this. Little Tussy told me apropos the OUTER MAN: 'BUI IT IS YOUR OWN FLESH!' By the by, I can't speak too highly of Dr Allen's behaviour towards me. He remarked, by the by, apropos the operation, that GERMAN PHILOSOPHERS were always self-consistent.

Obviously, the whole succession business is merely of diplomatic significance. As TO DENMARK, she is not, I think, bound by the Treaty of London38n in as much as the Danish Parliament was intimidated by Russian warships when the vote was taken. I enclose herewith Urquhart's nonsense,1 R. Schramm's nonsense,11

lastly a Danish pamphlet, which is of interest on at least two counts, 1. with regard to the fellows from whom the Schleswig- Holstein movement originally stemmed; 2. with regard to the stand taken by the peasants in Holstein.

In today's Times you will find under the heading 'Schleswig-

[^1]: As regards the 'sea-girt',a by and large, I agree with you.b

[^2]: •l Schleswig-Holstein is meant. 'Schleswig-Holstein meerumschlungen' are the opening words of a patriotic song popular at the time of the Duchies' struggle against Danish rule in 1848-49. - h See this volume, p. 496- c Presumably the material on the Schleswig-Holstein question published in The Free Press, Vol. XV, No. 12, 2 December 1863. - d R. Schramm, Die rothe Fahne von 1848 und Die schwarzweisse Fahne von I863, Eerlin, 1863.



