---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "299. Marx to Jenny Marx. 15 December "
Page_Range: "535-537"
---

# 299. Marx to Jenny Marx. 15 December 



**[p. 498]**

Holstein' an item by Dr Thudichum that is typical of German historiography."

I shall certainly get hold of a publisher for you in Germany. So, buckle to straight away.

I shall drop you a couple of lines as soon as I am in Trier. I also have to go to Holland, for my uncle1' is my MONSTER creditor.161

Salut.

Your

K. M.

But one mustn't irritate the Danes. They've got to understand that Scandinavians and Germans have a common interest in opposing Russia and that nothing could be more advantageous to themselves than the separation of the German element.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, long Published in English in full for the first time

299

Trier, 15 December 1863, Wednesday Gasthof von Venedig

Dear sweet darling jenny,

I arrived here exactly a week ago today. Tomorrow I am going to Frankfurt to see Aunt Esther' (NB: the lady, who was in Trier, was formerly in Algiers, and lives with my aunt, is also my father's sister, also an aunt, is called Babette,d familiarly 'Bäbchen', is rich). From Frankfurt I shall go to Bommel," as I wrote my unclelj

yesterday, probably to his dismay.

[^1]: MARX TO JENNY MARX2M

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Letter to the editor of The Times signed 'A German who is fond of facts', The Times, No. 24733, 4 December 1863. - •> Lion Philips - r Esther Kosel - d Babette Blum - e Zalt-Bommel



If I have been so long in writing to you, this was certainly not out of forgetfulness. Quite the reverse. I have made a daily pilgrimage to the old Westphalen home (in the Neustrasse), which interested me more than any Roman antiquities3fi2 because it reminded me of the happiest days of my youth and had harboured my greatest treasure. Moreover, every day and on every side I am asked about the quondam'1 'most beautiful girl in Trier' and the 'queen of the ball'. It's damned pleasant for a man, when his wife lives on like this as an 'enchanted princess' in the imagination of a whole town.

The reason I didn't write was that every day I hoped to have something definite to say, but up to this moment don't yet know of anything definite. For this is how matters stand. On my arrival I naturally found everything under seal save for such furniture as was in daily use. My mother, with her usual mania for assuming 'supreme command', had told Conradi not to bother about anything; she had so arranged matters that Uncle would see to 'everything'. What she gave Conradi was a notarial copy of a sort of will, which contained nothing but the following terms: 1. She left all the furniture and linen to Emilie13 with the exception of the gold- and silverware; 2. To her son Carl she leaves the 1,100 talers, etc.; 3. To Sophie,1 father's portrait. That's all there is to the will. (NB: Sophie has 1,000 talers a year, for the most part given her by the Philipses. So, after all, you see, my relations are decent 'folk'.)

Apart from this scrap of paper, my mother had lodged another (now invalid) legally attested will. This was of an earlier date and was nullified by the more recent will. It had been drawn up before Emilie's marriage. In it she had made Emilie the beneficiary of everything of which she was entitled to dispose. In addition, she had appointed Uncle Martin'1 and Uncle Philips her executors. She—or rather her bibulous notary Zell (deceased)—forgot to repeat this clause relating to executors in the scrap of paper which now alone is valid and which I have described above, so that if Uncle is the executor, it is only thanks to our bonne grace? (For which I, of course, have my own 'reasons'.) As yet, I know nothing about the actual value of the estate, because all the papers are in the sealed cupboard. The seals have not yet been removed because of the time-consuming formalities that have to be gone through before the Dutch powers of attorney (for Jutaf and Sophie) can arrive here. So far as I am concerned this will take too long. I am

[^1]: a sometime - b Emilie Conradi - t: Sophie Schmalhausen - ci Martin Presburg - e good graces - i Louise ]uta



