---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "300. Marx to Engels. 22 December "
Page_Range: "537-539"
---

# 300. Marx to Engels. 22 December 



**[p. 500]**

therefore giving Conradi power of attorney. Besides, there's nothing left here in Trier (Grünberg563 was sold long ago) except 5 casks of 1858 wine, which my mother refused to sell at the right moment, and some gold- and silverware. This will be shared out equally among the heirs. The real assets, however, are all in Uncle's hands.

My mother died at 4 in the afternoon of 30 November, on the very day and at the very hour of her marriage. She had predicted that she would die at that time.

Today I am attending to the things for Mr Demuth and Lieschen. I shall write to you at greater length from Frankfurt or Bommel. Greetings and much love to everyone. Above all and in particular, please give the CHINESE SUCCESSOR" a thousand kisses on my behalf.

Your

Karl

(I hope to be able to send you some money in my next letter.)

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original XVI. Jg., I. Bd., No. 1, Stuttgart, 1897- 1898 and in full in: Marx and Engels,

300

Zalt-Bommel, 22 December 1863

Dear Engels,

You will see from the address that I am back in Holland, where I arrived safely yesterday. In Trier, where the papers and effects left by my mother had been placed under seal, the unsealing could not take place because the Dutch powers of attorney, which must pass through the hands of an endless succession of authorities,

[^1]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 30, Moscow, 1963

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS239

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: •' Nickname for Marx's daughter, Eleanor.





**[p. 501]**

had not yet arrived. I left a power of attorney for my brother-in-law Conradi for submission to the Department of Trier and proceeded to headquarters here, firstly because my uncle3

holds by far the largest part of the assets, secondly because he is the executor of the will. However, in any case it will be another 5-6 weeks before I receive payment of the money. Since my wife has to pay a butcher's BILL for £10 on 10 January 1864 (i.e. a bill of exchange), I should be very glad if you could attend to it.

The carbuncle has gone the way of all flesh, but now for good measure my back is wickedly plagued with furuncles and last night, for example, thanks to these pestilential objects, I couldn't get a wink of sleep which would, after all, only have been fair after travelling here from Frankfurt a.M. The husbandb of a cousin' of mine is the town's only doctor and medical officer of health, so I am not in want of Aesculapian assistance.

Throughout the Rhine Province, from Trier to Frankfurt a.M. and thence via Giessen and Cologne right up to the Dutch frontier, I heard nothing but abuse of Prussia. Little, very little, Schleswig-Holsteinianism. For the most part, it was regarded as 'Prussian artfulness'.

I spent only one day in Frankfurt (where I had to visit two old auntsd) and hence wasn't able to see any publishers. However, I spoke to an acquaintance who will write to me here (after he has consulted with a publisher on my behalf) .e

Salut.

Your

K. M.

You might drop me a line or two. Address Charles Marx, CARE OF Mr Lion Philips, Zalt-Bommel, Holland.

[^1]: When writing your pamphlet/ it might be better if you were now to include some actual events as well, not forgetting the systematic blunders perpetrated by the Prussian government, the men of Progress371 and the regular—since 1815 inveterate— Schleswig-Holstein HUMBUGGERS.324

[^2]: 'Tu n'es pas un Yankee, s'écria le fanatique Depuis que tu es ici, je t'observe. Dans la figure du Saxon il y a du taureau et du loup; dans la tienne il y a du singe et du chien. Tu

[^3]: a Lion Philips - b Dr. A. van Anrooij - c Henriette van Anrooij, née Philips - d Esther Kosel and Babette Blum - e See this volume, p. 498.- f ibid., p. 496.



