---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "301. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 23 December "
Page_Range: "539-540"
---

# 301. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 23 December 



**[p. 1913]**

as peur de la liberté, tu parles de ce que tu ne sais pas, et tu jais des phrases. Tu es un Français!* (195-196, Paris en Amérique by Edouard Laboulaye.) (Paris 1863.)

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart,

301

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

Zalt-Bommel, 23 December 1863 Dear Freiligrath,

Your letter arrived today, having been sent on to Trier by my wife and from Trier to this address by my sister.b I left London two days after you called (on Mondayc). Otherwise, I should have had to keep traipsing into the CITY to see to the issue of powers of attorney for the executors of the will, which, in view of my physical condition at the time, would have been more irksome than a sea-crossing.

'Dr Liebknecht' has been living in Berlin for about a year now. His address is: 13 Neuenburger Strasse. I know nothing about the affair.SM But one thing surprises me about the bookseller. He continued to pay Wilhelm Liebkn. the fees on behalf of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung throughout the time L. was its correspondent. Hence it was in his power to deduct L.'s debt.

It was inexcusable of L., no matter what the circumstances, to make improper use of your name. But you have no responsibility whatever towards the bookseller, since Williams could have recovered the money himself.

Warmest regards.

Your

[^1]: K. M. First published in the supplement to: Printed according to the original F. Mehring, The Freiligrath-Marx Corres- pondence, Moscow-Leningrad, 1929 (in Published in English for the first Russian) t l r a e

[^2]: a 'You're not a Yankee, the fanatic exclaimed I've been watching you ever since you've been here. A Saxon's face has something of a bull and a wolf; yours has something of a monkey and a dog. You're afraid of liberty, you speak of things you know nothing about and you use an affected language. You're a Frenchman!' - b Emilie Conradi - '' 7 December



