---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "1864"
Page_Range: "542-604"
---

# 1864



**[p. 505]**

1 8 6 4

303

ENGELS TO MARX

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

Manchester, 3 January 1864

Dear Moor,

The many CHRISTMAS drinking-sprees and consequent GENERAL UNFITNESS FOR BUSINESS have rendered me utterly incapable of replying any sooner. However, the affair is now happily over.

I am sending your wife the amount in question/ For the rest, I'm delighted to hear that your second carbuncle has been operated on, and that you are thus over this latter crisis. You'll have got damned thin as a result of this tedious business.

The Schleswig-Holstein affair has come off the rails again good and proper. If, as I believe, there's war in the spring, we shall have Denmark, Sweden, France and Italy against us and, possibly, England. In Hungary and Poland Plonplonism,524 to which Kossuth had already pointed the way, is in full swing.567 I see only two ways out here: 1. either revolution in Berlin as soon as the troops have left and, in Vienna, a corresponding movement with concessions of an adequate kind to Hungary and, perhaps, also to Poland. That's what would be most favourable, and there would be nothing to fear in such a case. But it is also what is most improbable, in view of the confusion that prevails. Or, alternative- ly, 2. a restoration of the Holy Alliance511 for which, as always, the partition of Poland would provide the cement (Russia has a greater interest in Poland than in Denmark and also the prospect, come the armistice, of having Austria and Prussia under her thumb, i.e. being able to impose her own conditions).

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 500-01.



The mock war in Schleswig under Wrangel can't last very long.568 In the first place, the Danish fortifications will make even tlie initial encounters too bloody and, in the second, Boustrapa 167

is too much in need of a popular war not to seize this opportunity. What more could he ask than the restoration of the Holy Alliance and a war for both Poland and the Rhine with, for good measure, England and Italy and all the small states of Europe on his side?

Apropos. Our worthy Faucher, who shows himself a rabid Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg man in the Chamber," is, at the same time, sending The Manchester Guardian anti-German articles in which he arse-licks to the English bastards of The Times. Shouldn't one do something to unmask this louse?

If the curs in the Prussian Chamber were now to take their courage in both hands, they could straighten things out to their own satisfaction within the space of 6 weeks. Handsome William's reply shows what a fix the government is in.569 No one will fork out, not even the worthy von der Heydt, and they know they won't get any money par force!'

Lupus has just come to pick me up and sends you his kindest regards.

Here's to a good recovery and a Happy New Year.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briejii'echsel z-anscken F. Engels und K. Marx, 1kl. 3, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a J. Faucher's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 1 December 1863, reported in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 338, 4 December 1863. - b by force





**[p. 304]**

MARX TO ENGELS""

IN MANCHESTER

Zalt-Bommel, 20 January 1864

Dear Frederick,

As you see, I am still here and 'let me tell you something else, Sir', I am in fact once more unable TO MOVE ABOUT This is a disease of truly Christian perfidiousness. When I got your letter, I was congratulating myself on the way the old wounds had healed, but that self-same evening a large furuncle erupted just below my neck on the left-hand side of my chest and, antipodally to it, one on my back. Although irksome, it did not, at least, prevent me from walking and, in fact, I accompanied my uncle and cousin " on a stroll across the Rhine (Waal). But a few days later, yet another carbuncle appeared on my right leg, close beneath the spot of which Goethe says: 'And if the noble fellow has no bum, on what does he propose to sit?'b Now this is the most painful and embarrassing boil I have had so far, and I trust will be the last of a long series. In the meantime, I can neither walk, stand, nor sit, and find even lying down damned difficult. So you see, mon cher, how nature in her wisdom is persecuting me. Would she not be- better advised to inflict these trials of patience upon a good Christian — someone of the same stamp as Silvio Pellico? Besides the carbuncle beneath my buttock, I should inform you that another furuncle has erupted on my back, while the one on my chest has only just begun to heal so that, like a veritable Lazarus (alias Lassalle), I am assailed on all sides at once.

Apropos Lazarus, I am reminded of Renan's Life of Jesus which is, in many respects, simply a novel full of pantheistic-mystical extravaganzas. However, the book also has some advantages over its German predecessors and, since it isn't long, you ought to read it. It is, of course, a derivative of the German stuff. Most remarkable. Here in Holland the German critico-theological tendency is so much à l'ordre du jour1 that the clergy openly profess it from the pulpit.

As regards the Schleswig-Holstein affair, I hope that it will lead to clashes in Germany itself.5'1 How well Russia knows her

[^1]: 11 Lion and Antoinette Philips - b From Goethe's epigram Totalität. - c the order oi the day



The German petty princes are taking the fiction of the Schleswig-Holstein movement very seriously. They genuinely believe that Germania cannot have enough of them and is therefore intent on enthroning a 35th.c

I am writing you no more than a short letter, and that only with great effort, since it's agony for me to sit. But I shall expect an early reply from you; it CHEERS ME UP to see your handwriting.

Don't forget to enclose your photograph. I have promised my cousin as much, and how is she to believe in our Orestes-Pylades relationship, if I can't even commovered you to send a photograph? Address as before CARE OF Mr L. Philips.

Salut to yourself and Lupus.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

305

Dear Uncle,

I shall begin at the end. I arrived here yesterday ABOUT NOON in a frozen condition, FOR IT WAS DEVILISH COLD. My reception was all the warmer, and thus I enjoyed the delights inseparable from a complete contrast. En passant' yesterday and today were the coldest days there have been in London. So it seems I am fated to bring winter

[^1]: MARX TO LION PHILIPS239

[^2]: IN ZALT-BOMMEL

[^3]: London, 20 February [1864]e

[^4]: a The German phrase 'seine Pappenheimer kennen' (to know who one is dealing with) derives from Schiller's Wallensteins Tod. Ill, 15. - b Journal de Saint Pétersbourg, No. 293; 26, 27 and 28 December 1863 (7, 8 and 9 January 1864). - c See this volume, p. 503. - d induce - e Manuscript damaged. - f By the way



Our little childb *was quite enchanted by the really beautiful Dolly, Madame Augustc had chosen for her. I enclose some lines on the part of the child. She did not leave off bothering myself till I had promised her to enclose also for you a letter which she pretends to be written in Chinese characters and which an English friend has sent her.*

[In Amsterd]amd I found the whole family well and cheerful. [Augustc] was very busy and so I said [nothing] at all to him about financial matters. At the insurance office I was given thousand guilder notes, most of which I changed in Rotterdam, with Jacques'' help, into bills and ABOUT a quarter into BANKNOTES.

Nor, during the two days I was in Rotterdam, did Jacques have overmuch spare time. One day, he was pleading in a small town nearby and, the other, he had to attend a court of appraisal. On the whole, I should say that, since becoming engaged, he has had much more of AN EYE TO BUSINESS' than previously. I don't doubt that in a few years' time he will have a sound practice, the more so since he likes legal work. He himself told me that he wins nearly all his doubtful cases, and, if he goes to the trouble of telling one something like that, he can be taken at his word. He and I laughed a great deal about a man whom he describes as 'the client' par excellence. This man, he told me, was still young and, over the next 30 years OR MORE, might litigate away a lot more of his assets!

Incidentally, August also has a quite peculiar faith in the infallibility of the courts. He opines, for example, that the English lose nothing by the high cost of their legal procedure. People who didn't engage in litigation had just as much chance of obtaining justice as those who did. * In point of fact, it seemed his opinion that dear law is as good as cheap law, and perhaps better; and he is a fellow who knows something about such things.*

August gave me the 3 parts of the Aardrijkskunde? and, on top of that, Jacques provided me with a work on political economy (Dutch) by Vissering,h a professor at Leyden, and a copy of

[^1]: II Marx uses the Berlin dialectal form Untertanenbejeisterung instead of Untertanen- begeuterung. - h Eleanor Marx - c August Philips' wife - d Manuscript damaged. - '' August Philips - f Jacques Philips - K Geography - h S. Vissering, Handboek van

[^2]: praktische staathuishoudkunde.



Sorje Oppenheim^ which was already creating a great sensation in Amsterdam, has been performed here by my daughters to piano accompaniment * and they hope to perform it one day before their uncle*.

A great bundle of newspapers, etc., from various latitudes has accumulated for me here, *but I am firmly resolved to know nothing of politics until Monday next.

Now, my dear uncle, I bid you farewell. Despite carbuncles and furuncles, I consider the two months I have lived in your house, as one of the happiest episodes of my life, and I shall always feel thankful for the kindness you have shown me.

You will, of course, tell Rothhäuschenc that I send him my compliments and that I regret having been forced giving battle to him.

My best compliments to the whole family, especially Jettchen,d Dr Anrooij, and Fritz.e Mrs Marx and the girls also send their compliments. Please to give the enclosed lines to Netchen.f

Yours truly,

Charles M.*

[^1]: First published, in the languages of the Printed according to the original original (German and English), in the magazine International Review of Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956

[^2]: a Hildebrand, Camera obscura. - b A popular song - c Marx puns on the name of A. Roodhujzen. 'Rothhäusehen' means 'little red house'. - d Henriette Sophie van Anrooij - c Friedrich Philips - f Antoinette Philips





**[p. 306]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 25 February 1864

DEAR Frederick,

Just a few lines for the present to let you know of my return.561

As soon as the weather permits, I shall come up to Manchester for 2 days so as to see you in person again and, at the same time, give you an account of my AFFAIRS.

I have completely recovered and only one or two spots (specially on the upper part of my leg), which are in the final stages of healing up, continue to trouble me A LITTLE.. I haven't grown thin, but stout, despite my illness. True, I have given up smoking completely.

Pieper's sudden appearance on our doorstep was a real surprise. He's here to settle in his sister as a GOVERNESS. He spent 4 yrs as a schoolmaster in Bremen. Last year 'he ate the bread of the National Association','24 and even went to Italy at Augustenburg'sa

expense. He's the same bore and lout as he always was.

With kind regards to you and Lupus.

Your

K. M.

307

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] Friday, [11 March] 1864

DEAR Frederick,

Tomorrow I shall leave from Euston Station at 10 and arrive AT

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, joj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: MANCHESTER ABOUT 5 p . m .

[^4]: a Friedrich of Augustenburg



It WOULD BE FOOLISH to go on waiting for good weather. What has also prevented me from coming DURING THE TWO LAST

WEEKS—SOME NEW AND UNEXPECTED FURUNCLES BREAKING THROUGH DIFFERENT PARTS

OF THE BODY.

YOURS

Moor

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930

Published in English for the first time

308

MARX TO LION PHILIPS574

IN AACHEN

London, [29 March 1864]

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

Dear Uncle,

I presume all of you are already or still in Aachen, and am therefore sending this letter there. Had you decided to wait for the fine weather, you'd have had to stay at Bommel until now. Here, at any rate, March has been QUITE ABOMINABLE, apart from one or two fine days—cold, wet, and changing from one moment to the next. This may be one reason why I haven't so far rid myself of those confounded brutes, my furuncles. I curse them, but under my breath.

LITTLE Eleanor has had a rather bad cough for the past two days which is what is preventing her from writing to you. However, she asks me to send you many salutations and, *in regard to the Danish Question, begs me to tell you, that 'she don't care for such stuff, and that 'she considers one of the parties to the quarrel as bad as the other, and perhaps worse'*.

The difficulty about understanding Prussia's policy is due solely to people's delusion in crediting it with serious and far-sighted aims and projects. The Mormon Bible,575 for instance, is similarly most difficult to understand, precisely because there isn't an iota of sense in it. What Prussia was primarily aiming at was to make the army popular, an aim which the Schleswig-Holstein campaigns



**[p. 513]**

were already having to subserve in 1848.57fi Secondly, she was intent on closing the territory against German volunteer forces, democrats and the small states. Finally, Prussia and Austria, by exerting PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT, were to enable the Danish king,a who is hand in glove with them, to compel the Danes to make certain concessions at home and abroad. Austria could not, of course, leave Prussia to play this role on her own, and, at the same time, seized on the opportunity to effect a closer alliance with her against OTHER PÉRIPÉTIES.

T h e conference meets in London on 12th April.577 T h e very most it will do is resolve that Schleswig and Holstein be bound to Denmark in a personal union—maybe less, certainly not more. How little in earnest the whole affair is, despite powder, shot and blood-letting, will be apparent to you if only from the fact that, u p till this moment, neither Prussia nor Austria has declared war on Denmark, nor Denmark on Prussia and Austria. There is no better way of throwing dust in people's eyes than to set armies marching, horses stamping, and cannon thundering.

DESPITE ALL THAT, SERIOUS CONFLICTS may BE IMMINENT. Once again, Bonaparte finds himself virtually compelled to set his troupiers u p in business as 'freedom' exporters because of the great DISAFFECTION which is not only prevalent in Paris, but provokingly rearing its head in the elections/™ And this time, the way has been paved for him by those dogs .of Prussians.

T h e r e were two other things I had actually meant to write to you about—Roman division and darkness in outer space. But as the light is failing, my paper is running out and it's almost time

[^1]: Garibaldi's trip to England and the great ovations he will receive FROM ALL SIDES h e r e " 9 are, OR at least are meant to be, merely the prelude TO A NEW RISING AGAINST AUSTRIA As an ally of the Prussians in Holstein and Schleswig and an ally of the Russians by virtue of the state of siege in Galicia,580 Austria has made things very easy for her enemies. What with the present conditions in Poland, Hungary, and Italy, the popular sentiment in Germany, and the total change in England's position, a new Holy Alliance 5" would enable even Napoleon le Petith to play the great one. At this, moment, the best thing would be for peace to continue, for any kind of war would delay the outbreak of revolution in France.

[^2]: May God d a m n ME IF THERE BE ANYTHING MORE STUPID THAN THIS POLITICAL CHESSBOARD!

[^3]: •' Christian IX - b the Little, i.e. Louis Bonaparte. The nickname derives from Vktor Hugo's pamphlet Napoléon le Petit.





**[p. 514]**

Your affectionate nephew,

K. Marx

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in the magazine Inter- national Review of Social History, Vol. 1, Part 1, Assen, 1956

309

MARX TO LION PHILIPS239

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

London, 14 April 1864 1 Modena Villas, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

Dear Uncle,

I hope that the cough has gone the way of all flesh. As for myself, there hasn't been a sign of a FURUNCLE for a few days, and my doctor1 thinks that I am now rid of the things for good. And high time, too. The sun seems to be breaking through at last. But there's still a nasty wind blowing from the East. Eleanor's cough has gone. However, her sister Jenny has a very persistent COUCH, [which]d will disappear [only] with a change of wind.

At the Museum' I have been taking a look at Boethius's De arithmetica (he wrote at the time of the Völkerwanderung) on Roman division (he didn't, of course, know any other sort). From this and a number of other works with which I have compared it, I see that moderately simple calculations, such as household and commercial accounts, were never done with [figures] but with pebbles and similar tokens on an abacus. On this abacus several

[^1]: Conradi had already written to me before I got your letter, and I had replied, saying he could send the money here direct.c

[^2]: " Karl Philips - b Jean Philips - ' Allen - d Manuscript damaged. - e See this vol- ume, p. 501.- f the British Museum Library





**[p. 515]**

parallel lines were drawn and whatever was used, whether pebbles or other visual signs, denoted units on the first line, tens on the second, hundreds on the third, thousands on the fourth, etc. Such abacuses were in use throughout almost the whole of the Middle Ages and are still employed by the Chinese today. As for more complex mathematical calculations, at the time when these are found among the Romans, the latter already had the multiplica- tion table—Pythagoras's—which, however, was still very awkward and cumbersome, for that table consisted partly of its own characters, partly of letters of the [Gre]ek (later Roman) alphabet. But [since] division merely boils down to the analysis of the dividend into factors and the tables in question were taken to fairly high figures, this must have sufficed for the reduction of expressions such as MDXL, etc. Every number, e.g. M, was separately reduced to the factors which it formed with the divisor, after which the quotients were added together. Thus, for example, M divided [by] two=D (500), D divided by 2 = 250 e[tc]. That the ancient method placed insuperable difficulties in the way of very complex calculations is evident from the artifices to which that outstanding mathematician Archimedes had recourse.

As regards the 'darkness of outer space', this necessarily follows from the theory of light. Since colours only appear when light-waves are reflected by solids and since, in the intervals between the heavenly bodies, there is neither atmosphere nor any other kind of solid, these intervals must be pitch black. They allow the whole light-ray to pass through, which is simply another way of saying that they are dark. Moreover, space outside the atmosphere of the planets, etc., is fated to be damnably 'koud en kilm since the rays generate warmth only when they strike a solid, which is also why, summer or winter, it is icy cold in the higher air strata of our atmosphere—that is, owing to the thinness, hence the relative insubstantiality, of these layers. Bur

[^1]: Ought this affliction to afflict us Since it but adds to our delight?h

[^2]: And what good are light and warmth WHERK THERE IS NO EYE TO SEE

[^3]: THE ONE, AND NO ORGANIC MATTER TO KEEL THE OTHER? L o n g a g O t h e W o r t h y Epicurus had the sensible idea of banishing the gods to the intermundia (i.e. the empty spaces of the universe)581 and, indeed, R.V 'perfect curs' are fit denizens for those cold, cool, pitch dark,

[^4]: 'stoß"elooze wereldruimte'.d

[^5]: a icy cold - h From Goethe's Westöstlicher Diwan ('An Suleika'). - c Probably Roodhujzen's. - d spaces devoid of matter





**[p. 516]**

You can see what a good Dutchman I've become from the fact that little Jenny has already read half the Camera obscura* and Laura, me docente,h a large part OF THE FIRST von ME OF THE Aardrijks- kunde,c while even Eleanor knows 'Dans Nonneken dans' and 'Klompertjen en zijn wijfjen"* by heart. Best compliments from THE WHOLE FAMILY to you, and Karl, not forgetting madame la générale." With the weather being so fine, you surely won't have overlong to wait for your own beau jour!

Your affectionate nephew,

Karl Marx

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in the magazine Inter- national Review of Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956

310

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 April 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

T h e furunculosis persisted until ABOUT a week ago, which made me very 'peevish' and it was not until a day or two since that I was able to start work again.

Garibaldi and 'Karl Blind'! What a talent for puffing himself u p the last-named hydrocephalous crab-louse displays! 'Mr Karl

[^1]: DEAR FREDERICK,

[^2]: This month, April the first's privilege of being ALL FOOLS DAY, has been extended, at least in London, to the whole of April. Garibaldi and Palmerston FOR EVER on the WALLS of London! 5 8 2 Garibaldi with Pam and Clanricarde, and extolled by the ENGLISH POLICEMEN, at the Crystal Palace!583 In England there aren't any mouchardsgl T h e Bandiera brothers would have something to say about that.584

[^3]: '•* by Hildebrand - b with me as tutor - ' Geography - d 'Dance, little nun, dance' and 'The shoe and his wife' (Dutch nursery rhymes) - e Probably the wife of Karl Philips' father-in-law, a general. - f fine day - s police spies





**[p. 1913]**

Blind', the Athenaeum announces, 'HAS JOINED THE SHAKESPEARE COMMIT- TEE!'585 T h e fellow doesn't understand one line of S. I had to put u p considerable resistance and have doubtless completely forfeited W e b e r V esteem. For the Workers' Society3 (incited by W.) wanted m« to compose an address to Gar., and then call on him with a deputation. I REFUSED FLATLY.

When are you going to come here? T h e family is expecting you. Tomorrow sees the start of the conference 5 7 7 that will cause the scales to fall from the Teutons' eyes. Collet has announced himself for Thursday b and, at the same time, sent me a whole LOT of German literature on the Schleswig-Holstein-Lauenburg mess. Tomorrow I shall have to get down to a serious study of this disagreeable affair so as to be ready with my answers for the fellow, who has the entire genealogy' 8 6 at his fingertips. You may have noticed that the wretched Disraeli has spared Pam the trouble of answering Osborne's and Kinglake's motions on Schleswig-Holstein at the impending conference. Yesterday, Dis- raeli gave notice that he would put the PREVIOUS QUESTION. In all the SERIOUS AFFAIRS of the past 2 or 3 years (e.g. the Afghanistan business297) he has extricated OLD Pam from the MUDDLE.

You will see how pitiful (I mean what a DONKEY) Garibaldi is—he has been half KILLED, incidentally, by John Bull's EMBRACE—from the following, which is not, OF COURSE, common knowledge.

At the secret revolutionaries' congress in Brussels (September 1863)—which had Garibaldi as its nominal CHIEF—it was decided that G. should go to London, but do so incognito and thus catch the metropolis unawares. He was then to COME OUT for Poland IN THE STRONGEST POSSIBLE WAY. Instead of that, the fellow goes and frater- nises with Pam! I'd rather be a louse in sheep's clothing than a man of such brave stupidity, as Shakespeare says in Troilus and Cressida.c

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Kindest regards to Lupus and Lizzy.d

[^2]: Little Jenny still has a cough but strikes me as being much better. T h e new house 3 8 7 has, IN FACT, cheered her u p a great deal.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engeh und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart,

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a Josef Valentin Weber - b 21 April 1864 - ' Act III. Scene 3 - d Lizzy Burns





**[p. 311]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 April 1864

Dear Moor,

You will, presumably, at long last have rid yourself of the furunculosis. Meanwhile, Lupus has been suffering most vilely from the rheumatic headaches he was already having when you were here,573 and from which he has since had no respite—on the contrary, they have got worse and worse so that he's had no proper sleep for weeks. He's already been confined to bed again on several occasions, and that sod Borchardt does nothing at all about it; he treats the touch of gout Lupus has got in his toe (but which doesn't bother him at all now, whereas the headaches and insomnia are really sapping his strength) with Colchicum and doesn't even give him an occasional dose of opium. Once or twice I have spoken to Lupus pretty seriously about the matter, but you know how much good that does. He believes himself to be under an obligation to B., and that's that. All the QUACK has done is to cup him of ten ounces of blood! That was the day before yesterday. This evening I shall visit Lupus again and see how things are going. Three weeks ago I too had a violent and most painful attack of fheumatism of the respiratory muscles, but Gumpert cured me of it within 24 hours.

The Garibaldi tomfoolery3 came to a fitting end. The way the chap was shown the door after a week of being gaped at by the SWELLS is really too splendid and could happen nowhere but in England. It would be the ruin of anyone except Garibaldi, and even for him it's tremendously mortifying to have served the English aristocracy as a NINE DAYS' WONDER and then to have been thrown out into the street. They treated him as an out-and-out romantic. How could the fellow submit to it and how he could be so stupid as to take these Dundrearys for the English people? However, anyone who is not now convinced of the wholly bourgeois nature of this gentleman will never be convinced. For to respect the English press is almost worse than respecting the PEELERS.588 And as for his EXIT! Well, that beats everything.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 516.





**[p. 519]**

I was a bit surprised by the way the Prussian army carried out the assault. The attack took place with 4 brigades (24 battalions) against 4 Danish brigades (16 battalions), i.e. by no means disproportionate superiority for an assault of this kind. Admitted- ly, the Danes had been greatly worn down by artillery fire but so, for that matter, had the Russians at Sevastopol, and to un even greater extent.592 However, the fact that in 20 minutes the Prussians took the first 6 field-works and then, in 2 hours—N.B. without orders, for the worthy princec wanted to call it a day—the whole peninsula/ including the bridgehead, and inflicted losses of 5,000 on approximately 13,000 Danes, is more than one might have credited the fellows with. You will, by the way, remember that I have always said Prussian fire-arms—rifles as well as guns—were the best in the world, and that has been borne out here. On the other hand, the conference377 will soon reveal what marionettes their diplomats are. What with Russia, Boustrapa,167

and Palmerston, aided and abetted by the 'grand' policy of Bismarck, the 'fall' that follows after pride can hardly be long in coming. But how about money? After all, the 22 millions from the public treasury and the railway loan of 6 millions must have been squandered by now, and what then?

I shall descend on you one of these Friday evenings but not, of course, without writing to you first.

Write soon, and give my regards to the FAMILY.

Your

[^1]: F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, join Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a shining light - b Not everyone who wants can be a Soulouque (Victor Hugo, Napoleon le Petit, paraphrased). - c Friedrich Karl of Prussia - d Sundewitt





**[p. 312]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Sunday, 1 May '64 6.50 p.m.

Dear Moor,

I have just been to see Lupus, who also had Gumpert and Borchardt with him. They don't agree over the diagnosis, which doesn't matter a rap for the time being, since it's a question of restoring his strength first, and here G. at once intervened more energetically. Yesterday I asked B. about port but he thought that, as L. wasn't quite lucid, he would be better without it and, only this morning, suggested—Spanish fly! Today Lupus is to get a beerglassful of champagne every 2 hours and this evening will, in addition, be given brandy in the BEEF TEA he takes in between times. That scoundrel Borchardt who only last Wednesday let ten ounces of his blood!!3 For the rest, the situation is very bad, because whichever diagnosis may be right, one is as bad as the other. B.'s diagnosis is meningitis, inflammation of the inner scalp with a tendency to suppurate. G. hadn't yet been able to make one this morning, but thought that, in addition to the above, there might be uraemia (passage of urine into the blood as a result of degeneration of the kidneys) or anaemia with a localised affection of the nervous system. He had another call to make after the consultation, and so I was unable to talk to him at any length; as soon as I have heard his opinion I shall write to you.

I should like you to come up tomorrow for a few days.593 I foresee that I shall be very busy this week, and it's always a good thing, of course, if one of us sees the doctors a couple of times a day and promptly obtains whatever has to be obtained. Besides, it would be very nice for me anyway. If you are coming, send me a telegram from your station of departure to 7 Southgate, St. Mary's; it only costs a shilling.

In order to force his hand over the consultation, I was compelled to tell B. yesterday that you had just as much confidence in G. as I had and that, if Lupus were to die, you would never forgive me had I failed to call G. in for a

[^1]: ' c^^ this volume, p. 518.





**[p. 521]**

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

313

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 2 May 1864

Dear Moor,

The outlook for Lupus grows daily worse. His state of delirium is getting more and more chronic. He still recognises the people who come to see him quite well, but in between times he talks in a completely RAMBLING fashion and it is only after taking a strong dose of stimulants that he has his more lucid moments. However, these moments are becoming dimmer and briefer all the time. Gumpert has very little hope now; his diagnosis is softening of the brain as a result of the prolonged headaches brought on by cerebral hyperaemia and of the insomnia thus induced. There's no longer any question of Borchardt's meningitis; he has accepted G.'s diagnosis and generally does everything G. suggests, though he seems to have very hazy ideas about the origin of the headaches.

Each day Lupus spends in this stupor, from which stimulants are incapable of rousing him, naturally makes matters worse and, if the next 3-4 days bring no improvement, the poor devil will go under either from debility or apoplexy or, if he pulls through, he'll be an idiot. This alternative—death or imbecility—is really too frightful. Gumpert, of course, is extremely guarded when talking about his colleague but I'm sure of the fact that L. could have been saved if the headache had been properly treated and if, in particular, something had been done to enable L. to sleep. But it was not until last Thursday, after five weeks of insomnia, that B.



**[p. 522]**

There is another consultation at 9 tomorrow morning which I shall also attend to see what he does. B. intends to get a male nurse for him today. If only the poor fellow pulls through!

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

314

ENGELS TO MARX492

IN LONDON

[Manchester, 2 May 1864] Monday evening 8.30

Dear Marx,

Lupus is going rapidly downhill. He's having hallucinations, keeps jumping out of bed, etc. What we're short of now is a man to sit up with him and stop him injuring himself. There is only one professional male nurse up here, and he is engaged. Admittedly, Borchardt could get hold of one from a nearby lunatic asylum, but so long as there is the slightest chance of recovery he doesn't, of course, want that kind of person, being anxious to avoid subsequent gossip and the harm it would do L. He now wonders whether you might perhaps have a reliable man, who doesn't need to be a nurse by profession, far better not, but is simply reliable in that he will do what he is told and not fall asleep—maybe you have such a man and can send him up here first thing tomorrow, for we are provided for only up till tomorrow and periculum in mora.* S'il s'en trouve,h send him at once to Borchardt, Rusholme Road, Manchester.

[^1]: a there is danger in delay - b If one is to be had





**[p. 6]**

If you have nobody, Borch. asks that you telegraph him first thing tomorrow (it costs a shilling), so that he and Gurapert can continue to look round up here.

I have just telegraphed you to this effect, but the present letter is necessary to an understanding of the telegram.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

315

MARX TO JENNY MARX239

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 9 May 1864 Dear Jenny,

POOR Lupus died today, at 10 minutes past 5 in the afternoon. I have just left his death-bed.

I went to see him on the evening of the day I arrived from London," but he was unconscious. The next morning he recog- nised me. I saw him in company with Engels and the two doctorsb

and, when we were leaving, he called after us (in a weak voice): 'You will come back, won't you?' It was a moment of lucidity. Soon afterwards he relapsed into a state of apathy. Up till Thursday— or really Friday' — evening, things hung in the balance so that there was some doubt about the outcome. But he was unconscious from Friday evening until the moment of his passing away. So long did it take for him to die, though he was not in pain. He was unquestionably the victim of that bombastic bungler/ I shall write at greater length tomorrow.

In him we have lost one of our few friends and fellow fighters. He was a man in the best sense of the word. His funeral will be on Friday.'

Your

[^1]: Karl First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in Annali, an. I, Milan, 1958

[^2]: 1 3 May - h Louis Borchardt and Eduard Gumpert - ' 5 and May - 1 Borchardt - •' 13 May

[^3]: 21—558





**[p. 316]**

MARX TO JENNY MARX239

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 10 May 1864

Dear Jenny,

POOR Lupus, as it now transpires—and as Borchardt already knew—had accumulated a nest-egg by dint of hard and unremit- ting work.

In his will (of December 1863) he appointed Engels, Borchardt and myself his executors, and the notary has just read us his will. In it he leaves:

1. £100 to the Manchester Schiller Institute429

2. £100 to Engels 3. £100 to Borchardt and 4. The entire residue, amounting to six or seven hundred pounds, to me (to you and the children should I predecease him; he took care of all eventualities), likewise his books and all other effects.

I must now go to his lodgings and sort out his papers. Luckily he was living—during the final 6 or 7 weeks, at any rate—with exceptionally good and worthy people and enjoyed the best possible nursing. The inane telegrams about nursing attendants3— of which Gumpert knew nothing—were sheer ostentation and consequentiality on the part of Bombastus B.

A thousand kisses to you and the children.

Your

Karl

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (German), in Annali, an. I, Milan, 1958

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 523.





**[p. 317]**

MARX TO JENNY MARX239

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Friday, 13 May 1864

Dear Heart,

Today was the day of our good comrade's funeral.a We purposely didn't send out any invitations, otherwise half the town would have been there. So, it was attended by Borchardt, Gumpert, Engels, Dronke, Steinthal, Marotzki (the Friends of Light594 Protestant pastor at whose house Lupus used to teach and who came as a personal friend), Beneke (one of the leading business men here), Schwabe (ditto), 3 other business men, a few boys and some 15-20 members of the 'LOWER CLASSES' amongst whom Lupus was very popular. I naturally made a short funeral oration. It was an office by which I was much affected so that once or twice my voice failed me. Freiligrath wrote, begging to be excused, because of the presence in London of his principal, Fazy. Engels, and more especially Dronke, refused to countenance this excuse, and tomorrow D. will be taking him to task in London.

I shall have to stay here for at least another 3 or 4 days in order to get through with the whole business, pay the estate duty, swear oaths, etc. Naturally I shall not leave Manchester until everything is settled.

At first, it was thought that poor Lupus was suffering from incipient softening of the brain. This was wrong, however. Gumpert had previously said that he was suffering from cerebral hyperaemia (excessive accumulation of blood in the brain). This was confirmed at the post mortem, which also proved that he would still be alive today had he received correct treatment of the most common or garden kind. Borch. had completely and utterly neglected the thing in the most unscrupulous way. And yet one can't raise a shindy about it, if only because of B.'s family, who were deeply attached to Lupus (especially B.'s eldest daughter) and did a great deal for him, and whom he for his part thought highly of. All the same I refused B.'s invitation to dinner today (at which Engels, etc., were to be present) on the grounds that I could not accept hospitality on the day of Wolff's funeral.

[^1]: " Wilhelm Wolffs

[^2]: 21*



Lupus had carefully kept all our children's letters, and it was only a few weeks ago that he again told Mrs Borchardt how much he enjoyed getting little Tussy's notes.

The day before yesterday Marotzki (while confirming the children, amongst them one of the younger Borchardts) pro- nounced a public eulogy on Lupus in his church. I don't believe anyone in Manchester can have been so universally beloved as our poor little friend (who as a child broke both legs and was in pain for years until they had healed again). Amongst the letters he left, I found evidence of the warmest sympathy on the part of all kinds of people—pupils, both girls and boys, and, in particular, their mothers.

My warmest greetings to all.

Your

Karl

Send 3 photographs of DEAR Eleanor immédiatement.

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in Annali, an. I, Milan,

318

MARX TO HIS DAUGHTER, JENNY

[Manchester,] Tuesday, 17 May 1864

Sweet child, Badman,

Probably I shall leave Manchester on Thursday (May 19) this week, and probably Engels will come with me.595 If arrangements be changed, I'll advertise you timely.

I visited Ernest Jones yesterday and renewed my old friendship with him. He received me very cordially. Eichhoff, who is here at this moment, and sends to all of you his compliments, wrote me this morning that the son-in-law of Dr. Rohde—Marriett—has suddenly died; the daughter" being thus thrown back upon

[^1]: 1958

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Thekla Marriet



Liverpool and the parents. Eichhoff has at last settled down as a commercial employé.

Little Dronke, who to-day arrived from London, told funny stories as to the meeting he had a few days since with Freiligrath. Fazy, Freiligrath's master, was present at the rendezvous at 2 Royal Exchange Buildings.

Strohn, an old friend of mine—who, unhappily, finds himself in a very bad state of health, and whom I was hardly able to recognise—came down from Bradford to see me; Eichhoff having told him of my sojourn at Manchester.

Gumpert has been blessed with a son. I address these lines to you, because you will probably have to make room for Engels, your room being, I believe, the only disposable one. You don't want to care about wine which we bring with us, but a dozen bottles of Pale Ale for our Manchester man will be welcome. J cannot finish my business here,596 because this week is a holiday for lawyers here. So things will not be settled before next week, and in my absence.

I have seen, from Möhmchen's" letter, with great concern, that Marie Lormier is not going on in the right direction. These doctors are a lot of quacks.

Any letter you'll address me, will still find me at Manchester, if you post it tomorrow before 5 o'clock p.m.

I hope, my dear child, to find you in full bloom. My humble compliments to your successor, and my knowing wink to mine secretary.

Your truly

Old one

I should very much like to buy here Manchester silk for the whole family, but the delay that, consequent upon the holiday, has taken place in the settlement of affairs, prevents me from indulging my fancy.

[^1]: G. J. Harney, as you may tell Möhmchen, has again married, and, moreover, left Europe for Australia.598

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in the magazine Voinstvuyushchii muterialist, No. 4, 1925

[^3]: Reproduced from the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: Jenny, Marx's wife





**[p. 319]**

ENGELS T O HERMANN ENGELS

IN BARMEN

Manchester, 24 May 1864

Dear Hermann,

You must excuse my keeping you waiting some little while for a reply to your letter of the 7th and that of the 18th.

As regards the £"1,000, I shan't be able to remit this to you before 1 July, or perhaps a little later. That is to say I must await the statement of accounts on 30 June of this year, since G. Ermen will release himself from the contract if so much as a penny is missing from the £10,000 I have to put up. Until then, therefore, I must tread carefully. I also mentioned this to Mother in my letter of 7 April,599 and hence the best thing would be for you to pay Wiebelhaus & Busch from over there. In any case, for a sum of the order of £1,000, I wouldn't be able to lay my hands on bills as short as a week after date. More about this matter, then, in July or August; I am in no hurry whatever.

It had struck me, by the way, that this £"1,000 could be partially reimbursed by my prevailing on G. E. to send off to you in advance the interest amounting to £375 due on 30 June; but, since our bankers are now paying us 6% interest, he'll take good care not to give you the money at 5%.

As regards my balance with you over there, this should be dealt with as follows:

On 30 June, the £10,000 which, under the terms of the contract, must remain here, will be debited to me over there. Deduct from that the portion of my balance there on which the interest accrues to me; as to the remainder I must refund you the interest à 5%. The portion of my balance of which Mother has the usufruct would best continue to be credited to me separately, since it doesn't figure in my favour when interest is calculated and would therefore only muddle up the calculation.

The one question that may have to be considered in this connection is the exchange rate at which £s are to be converted into talers. In my view, the simplest thing in all present and future cases relating to my account would be to take the average rate of 6 talers 20 silver groschen, as Father also used to do in his books, so that the £10,000 will be debited to me as 66,666.20 talers, while all



**[p. 529]**

reimbursements made by me in £s will be credited at the same rate. Think it over and let me know what you think about it.

As regards the transfer of the £10,000 to my account, you have no need to advise G. E. further; the contract, to which you are all subject, is sufficient.

Very many thanks for the pictures. They've touched up your face a bit more than is necessary; apart from that, they're very good. But you must now see to it that the other ones for my album follow on soon, and also remind the good Boellings about it, for so far I have none of them at all. In the case of the Blanks, I don't have one of Maria Senior, Emil Junior, Rudolf, and the younger ones.

Apropos. Should Ermen &: Engels over there be asked to pay the costs of an insertion, to which I was a co-signatory, in the deaths' column of the Kölner," Breslauerb and Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, I would ask you to attend to it and debit me accordingly.600

Give my love to Mother, if she is still in Barmen, and tell her that I've been keeping very well. Much love to Emma' (she's still not as plump as she used to be, but I trust that will resolve itself) and the little ones as well as to Rudolf and family, the Blanks, and the Boellings.

Your

Friedrich

320

[London,] Thursday, 26 May 1864 Dear Frederick,

It came as a very 'pleasant' surprise this morning (I had not been able to sleep the preceding night) to find my chest again adorned with two 'charming' FURUNCLES. Will you consult Gumpert

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , ,. , ,. Moscow 1934 Published m English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS249

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: " Kölnische Zeitung - b Breslauer Zeitung - c Emma Engels - d Rudolf Engels





**[p. 530]**

as to what I should do? I don't want to take iron since I already have a tendency to cerebral congestion. Nor do I wish to go to Allen, there being nothing I dread so much as having to recommence a regular course of treatment, thus disrupting my present work, and I simply must get the thing done at long last.547

Despite all that people said about how well I looked, I have all the while felt there was SOMETHING WRONG and the tremendous resolution I have to summon u p before I can tackle more difficult subjects also contributes to this sense of inadequacy. You EXCUSE THIS SPINOZISTIC TERM. Have OUR POOR Lupus's books been sent off to London? h01 I am worried about their non-arrival because—or so I understood—your WAREHOUSEMEN were supposed to have sent them off on Thursday (last).

WHAT DO YOU SAY OF GRANTS OPERATIONS?™2 All that The Times chooses to admire, OF COURSE, is Lee's strategy disguised as RETREATS.3 Says Tussy this morning, ' I T CONSIDERS THIS VERY CANNY, I DARESAY.' There's nothing I would be happier to see than success for Butler. It would be of inestimable value, were he to enter Richmond first. It would be bad if Grant had to retreat, BUT I THINK THAT FELLOW KNOWS WHAT HE IS ABOUT. It is to him, at any rate, that credit is due for the first Kentucky campaign, Vicksburg and the drubbing Bragg received in Tennessee.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Enclosed a note from Jones, in view of which you will, no doubt, be able to invite him FOR ANOTHER DAY.60'

[^2]: T h e WHOLE FAMILY send you their regards.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 19)3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: 77«" Times, 25 and 26 May 1864, leading articles.





**[p. 321]**

ENGELS TO MARX249

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 30 May 1864

Dear Moor,

The books haven't gone off yet, nor has the wine. They will go off together. Have heard nothing from either Borchardt or the lawyer; shall call on the latter the day after tomorrow and give him the power of attorney.604

Gumpert says that, if the furuncles are merely stragglers, you should do nothing further about them. I discussed little Jenny with him; he says it would seem to be a chlorotic condition and that sudden attacks of asthma are common in such cases, and are due to circulatory disorders; nothing could be done save treat the condition as a whole, nor could he think of anything beyond what Allen is already doing. Anyhow, he didn't seem to take too serious a view of the thing.

The Virginian campaign is once again characterised by inconclu- siveness, or more precisely, by the difficulty of taking it to any sort of decision on terrain like this.602 I set no store by the news received per Scotia; all it means is that a week's rain has saved Lee from the necessity of fighting battle after battle à la Solferino.M5

And for him, that means a great deal. Another 2 such battles and his army, which had to withdraw to a new position every night and was in any case in a very sorry state, would hardly have been capable of making a stand anywhere before Richmond. Certainly Grant also benefited from the standstill, but not to the same extent. The reinforcements he is now obtaining won't be worth very much. But I shouldn't be surprised if Lee were soon to withdraw to Richmond. Then the decisive battle will take place there.

Bismarck seems to have colossal good luck; it really looks as though there's going to be an Augustenburgian peace.606 As yet I can make neither head nor tail of it, but my view would seem to be confirmed by the very hectoring article in today's Morning Post? (It says, inter alia, that Schleswig should be partitioned and—the Eider form the new frontier between Danish and German

[^1]: •' Tlte Morning Post, No. 28222, 30 May 1864, leading article.





**[p. 532]**

Schleswigl) Nevertheless, plausible though it all seems, I can hardly see the Russians giving up, without more ado, all the spoils of 1851/52,607 the less so since they would not, so far as one can see, get anything in return.

I have been engrossed in the arithmetic in your Francoeur? a section you would seem pretty well to have ignored, if the failure to correct the scandalous printing errors in the figures is anything to go by. Though individual bits are quite elegant, the practical aspect of arithmetic is handled in a shockingly inept and superficial manner, being better taught at any German school. I also doubt whether it is practical to discuss things such as roots, powers, series, logarithms, etc., even at elementary level, merely in terms of numerals (without any recourse to algebra and, IN FACT, without presupposing an elementary knowledge of the same). Although the use of numerical examples by way of illustration may be a good idea, I should say that to limit oneself to numerals is, in this case, less conducive to clarity than simple algebraic treatment with a+b, precisely because the general expression is simpler and clearer in algebraic form and is something which cannot be dispensed with here. Admittedly, this particular section is really beneath the dignity of the mathematician par excellence.

I shall send you Danskeb papers tomorrow. In several Jutland towns Prussian officers are said to have objected very strongly before carrying out the confiscation in accordance with orders. Generally speaking, there have been no complaints anywhere about the troops, only about the generals and their orders. In the Dagbladet England is, if anything, more roundly abused than in Germany.

No other news, save that it's bitterly cold. Warm regards to your wife and the girls. I HOPE TUSSY IS CONTENT WITH THE COTTON.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a Presumably L. B. Francoeur's Cours complet de mathématiques pures. - b Danish





**[p. 322]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 June 1864

Dear Frederick,

Herewith

1. A scrap of paper sent me today in a wrapper from Brussels by jackass Kertbeny;

2. Cutting from the Rheinische Zeitung containing an obituary of Lupus—written by Eisner, now one of the editors of the Breslauer Zeitung, from which the Rheinische has reprinted ita;

3. Another cutting from the Rhein. Zeit., in which I would draw your attention to the article 'Der feudale Sozialismus'13;

4. Letter from one Klings of Solingen to one Moll over here. To enable you to understand this letter, I should explain that Moll (and also a companion of hisc) is a working man from Solingen, who (along with the aforesaid companion) has evaded a 4 months' prison sentence (the result of Lassalle's performances last year). Klings, ditto a working man, is Baron Izzy's authorised representa- tive in Solingen.

The two Solingen refugees came to see me here; they informed me of their enthusiasm for Izzy and how the workers had harnessed themselves to his carriage when he was last in Solingen. They assumed as a matter of course that we two were hand-in- glove with Izzy (who, when last in Elberfeld, made a speech about Lupus608). Klings, they said, was a former member of the League,63

as were all the working men who were leaders of Izzy's movement in the Rhine Province, and that, now as ever, all were our resolute supporters. He also showed me Klings' letter, and I asked whether I might have it to send to you.609 To this he assented. So, don't return it. I did not, of course, enlighten the chaps as to our relations, or rather non-relations, with Izzy, but got others to drop some pretty vague hints.

Now the men are hanging about here, unemployed. 50 talers are to be sent them from Solingen, the local Workers' Society3 is

[^1]: a [K. F. M. Eisner,] 'Kasematten-Wolff, Breslauer Zeitung, Morgen-Ausgabe, 24 May 1864; Rheinische Zeitung, No. 145, 26 May 1864. - b 'Feudaler Sozialismus', Rheinische Zeitung, No. 149, 30 May 1864. - c Julius Melchior





**[p. I]**

giving them £2; we shall be collecting a bit more here, and it would be a good thing if Manchester could contribute a pound or two. T h e fellows must be conveyed to America, since they are factory hands (Solingen cutlers, etc.) and are quite unsuitable for London handicrafts. 'What's come over me?' I asked myself more than once while reading Izzy's Lohnarbeit und Kapital? For in its essentials it seemed to me familiar, literally so (if embellished in the Izzian manner), yet not cribbed direct from the Manifesto!' etc. Then, a couple of days ago, I happened to look out my series of articles on 'Wage-labour and Capital' in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1849) which were in fact merely a printed version of lectures I had delivered in 1847 at the Brussels Workers' Society.131 There I found my Izzy's immediate source and, as a special act of friendship, shall reproduce the whole caboodle from the N. Rh. Z. as a note or appendix to my book—ON FALSE PRETENCES, of course, and without any mention of Izzy.B1° H e won't enjoy it in the least.

T h e books have arrived,601 ditto the wine, for which many thanks. Tussy asks me 'TO GIVE YOU HER LOVE AND TO TELL YOU THAI YOUR

COTTON HAS SOMEWHAT IMPROVED'.

Borkheim has made ABOUT £ 2 , 0 0 0 — u n d e r the patronage of Oppenheim, the 'Jew Süss'c of Egypt. Oppenheim, to whom, according to the account B. himself gave me, he played more or less the part of jester in the land of the pyramids, wanted to keep him there on the spot. But Europeans die there like flies, so B. arranged instead to be entrusted from time to time with a little bit of business by Abul Haim, as Oppenheim is called by the Arabs. This summer he will again visit Constantinople to that end.

K. M.

Wherever honours are being handed out, there friend Freilig- rath is sure to be. Cf. Eisner's obituary. Remember Harney's funeral oration for Schramm. And now New York has seen the

[^1]: T h e girls a n d m a d a m e send you their kindest regards. MY co Mri.i MENTs TO Liccy.d

[^2]: Salut.

[^3]: Your

[^4]: Apropos.

[^5]: a F. Lassalle, Herr Bastiat-Schulze von Delitzsch, der ökonomische Julian, oder: Capital und

[^6]: Arbeit, Berlin, 1864. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - c J. Süss-Oppenheimer - d Lizzy Burns





**[p. 535]**

publication by a local society of a very sumptuous Record of the Revolution* in which all the EVENTS, documents, etc., of the present Civil War are REGISTERED from the time it first started. WELL, this RECORD has been sent gratis to some 20 or 30 people (including various European libraries), among them the QUEEN OF ENGLAND,1" J. Stuart Mill, Cobden, Bright, and—Freiligrath. He informed me of this, with the phrase that the Yankees had 'afforded him great pleasure and done him a great honour', and gave me the accompanying letter to read along with the printed list of the fortunate few. I should dearly like to know what the good fellow has done, might do, or intends to do for the Yankees. But loi générale': Freiligrath is to receive the honneurs on behalf of the German nation because the worthy citizen adopts so worthy and neutral an attitude, 'and, come to that, hasn't really learnt anything'.611

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , ,. ,,),„ Published in English tor the lirst time

323

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 3 June 1864

Dear Moor,

I beg to confirm my lastd and today would humbly inform you that Lupus's will passed through the COURT OF PROBATE612 the day before yesterday and that I have taken possession of the document in question. I have also shown it to the bank and had it registered there, and on Monday or Tuesdaye shall draw the money from the bank (I can do this on my own without Borchardt) and remit it to you. There is about £230. I shall try and see B. tomorrow or on Monday and shall then do all I can to get the matter speedily wound up. The approximate amount of estate duty—£12f—will

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: " The Rebellion Record: a Diary of American Events - b Victoria - c general law

[^3]: d See this volume, p. 531. - e 6 or 7 June - f In the original: '£120', apparently a slip of the pen





**[p. 536]**

be retained by me up here plus a bit extra for the LAWYER'S bill, etc. The latter tells me that to safeguard oneself against any possibility of future claims one should, about 1 month after PROBATE (i.e., as from 1 July), insert 3 successive notices in.the Gazette," Times and LOCAL PAPERS, addressed to undeclared creditors and limiting the period of liability. This means the final settlement will be somewhat further delayed. The demand for payment of duty will be made in September or thereabouts (so until then interest on the amount in question will be recoverable), after which we shall have to deal with Wood's account and pay over the money; it will then be possible to dispose of the matter finally.

I have discovered the chap to whom Lupus went to be photographed and who has the original negative. I have had 24 prints done, 4 of which I enclose; you might give one each to Pfänder and Eccarius, and if you want any more they are yours for the asking. I took this opportunity of having another one taken of myself, the result of which you will find enclosed; people here say it is very good.b

Free Press received with thanks. What will POOR Collet set his hand to, now that Othello's OCCUPATION is GONE? And that poor, clever boyc who is party to all the secrets of highest diplomacy?

Many regards. How goes it with the furuncles?

Your

F. E.

[London,] 7 June 1864 Dear Frederick,

Have received your photogram, also those of Lupus. I need AT LEAST 4 more COPIES of the latter. Your photogram is excellent. The

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, igj3 Published in English for the first

[^2]: time

[^3]: 324 MARX TO ENGELS613

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: a The London Gazette - b See this photograph between p. 538 and p. 539.- c Probably Urquhart





**[p. 537]**

children say that it makes you look a 'pleasant subject'.3 As the new photograms we intended to have taken have not yet materialised, little Jenny yesterday sent you the glass thing. The Dagbladet received with THANKS.

The enclosed letter from Liebknecht which I got yesterday will interest you in several respects. You should place it in the archives, like the other letters of this kind I send you. I immediately replied to L., generally commending him for his attitude and only reprimanding him for the silly stipulation—our collaboration—he made in regard to the proposed publication of Lassalle's PAPER— now happily abandoned.614 I explained that, while we consider it politic to give Lassalle a completely free rein for the time being, we cannot identify ourselves with him in any way In the course of this week I shall send him (Liebknecht) some money. The poor devil seems to be doing damned badly. He has given a very good account of himself and his continued sojourn in Berlin is most important to us.

Borkheim showed me a letter from the great Orges, presently in Vienna. O. intimates that 'softening of the brain' has 'got the better' of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, that 'particularism' rather than 'Teutonism' holds sway over the paper, that one of the four proprietors of the Augsburg A. Z. had 'insulted' him (the 'great Orges') 'almost personally', that his hands had long been tied and he had finally resigned, etc. SERVES O. RIGHT. The fellow treated us vilely over the Vogt affair.b

Borkheim has given me very exact particulars in writing, authenticated on the spot, concerning progress on the Suez Canal. I shall see that Daud Pashac is advised of the same.

As for the Danish affair, the Russians are in a very difficult position. They drove Prussia into the war by promising her the earth and, as a quid pro quo for Prussia's help, past and present, over the Polish business,607 held out great prospects in regard to

Schleswig-Holstein. Needless to say, handsome William,d now that he looks upon himself as WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR, cannot be fobbed off in the same way as his brilliant predecessor.615 As for Palmerston, his hands are tied by the Queen.e Bonaparte, whom the Russians and their Pam wanted to use as a scapegoat to propitiate the Germans, HAS REASONS OF HIS OWN for playing the deaf-mute. Come to that, aside from a possible secret treaty with Prussia, the Russians are now chiefly concerned with 'German

[^1]: a In the original 'anjenehmer Jejenstand' instead of 'angenehmer Gegenstand'. b See this volume, pp. 10, 13-14. - c Urquhart - d William I - e Victoria





**[p. 538]**

sympathies'. It is therefore possible that, under SUCH CIRCUMSTANCES, they will 'sacrifice' Schleswig-Holstein, just as, in the 3rd partition of Poland, Catherine II declared the cession of the present kingdom of Poland to the Prussians to be a great sacrifice on her part—with the mental reservation, of course, that, when the time came, the sacrifice would be retrieved.5" The outrageous step the Russians have now taken in the Caucasus,616 watched by the rest of Europe with idiotic indifference, virtually compels them—and indeed makes it easier for them — to turn a blind eye to what is happening elsewhere. These 2 affairs, the suppression of the Polish insurrection and the annexation of the Caucasus, I regard as the two most important events to have taken place in Europe since 1815. Pam and Bonaparte can now say that they have not ruled in vain, and, if the Schleswig-Holstein war572 has served no other purpose than to hoodwink Germany and France about those two great events, it will have done its job for the Russians, whatever the outcome of the London Conference.577 You will see from Liebknecht's letter that the Prussian liberal press is too cowardly even so much as to remark on the continued surrender of Polish refugees by the Prussians. Bismarck has killed it stone dead with the Schleswig-Holstein business.

The AMERICAN NEWS looks very good to me; I was particularly delighted by today's LEADER in The Times, in which it is proved that Grant has been continually beaten and may perhaps be punished for his defeats—with the capture of Richmond!

Salut.

Your

Moor

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3. Stuttgart. ig]3 Published in English in full lor the first time





**[p. 325]**

ENGELS TO MARX249

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 June 1864

Dear Moor,

Your telegram received; the other halves of the five banknotes follow herewith. I have cleaned up the glass photogram" a bit and now find that it's very good. I shall show it to Gumpert and his wife this evening.

Clearly it's of the utmost importance to us that Liebknecht should be in Berlin—to spring surprises on Izzy and also, at an appropriate moment, quietly to enlighten the workers at large about our attitude towards him. At all events, we must keep him there" and support him to some extent. If you send him some money now, it will encourage him a great deal and, if you think any more is needed, let me know and I'll send you a five pound note for him.

Apropos obituary for Lupus. We must do a kind of biography; I think we ought to have it printed in Germany as a pamphlet, with the whole of the parliamentary debate1' as an appendix. Let's not allow the thing to slide.617

What do Borkheim's reports say about progress on the Suez Canal? Have matters actually got to a stage that points to its early completion?

I'm very anxious to see how things go in Virginia. The sides still seem to be almost evenly matched and mere chance, the opportunity of scoring an isolated victory over just one of Grant's corps, might restore Lee's superiority. The battle before Richmond may be fought under quite different circumstances, for Butler is certainly weaker than Beauregard, otherwise he wouldn't have let himself be forced on to the defensive and, even if one were as strong as the other, Lee, if he linked up with Beaur. at Richmond, would certainly be stronger than Grant and Butler combined. For Lee can debouch with his entire force from his fortified camp on each side of the James River, whereas Grant must detach part of

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 536.- b W. Wolff's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on 26 May 1849 (see K. Marx, Herr Vogt, VI, present edition, Vol. 17, and F. Engels, Wilhelm Wolff, X, present edition, Vol. 24).

[^2]: 22—558





**[p. 540]**

his troops (to the south side of the river). But I am hoping that Grant will, nevertheless, go through with the affair; at all events, there can be no doubt that, after the first battle in the Wilderness, Lee has shown little further inclination to engage in decisive encounters in the open field,618 on the contrary, he has always kept his main force in fortified positions and only committed himself to brief attacks. I also like the methodical pace of Grant's operations. On such terrain and with such an opponent it's the only correct method.

A collection for the Solingen chaps3 won't produce anything up here; however, it goes without saying that I shall send you something for them. Let me know, when you've reached that stage, how much they have got for the journey and how much it will cost.

Three days ago our old Hill finally handed in his cash box, but is, understandably enough, still quite incapable of tearing himself away from the office. He still haunts it every day, just as he has always done. It was not until today that he stayed away, at least for the morning, but after his dinner couldn't stand it any longer.

Many regards.

Your

F. E.

326

[London,] 16 June 1864 DEAR Frederick,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913, and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS67

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: THANKS FOR Dagbladet. Before I start on this letter—and so that I don't forget—here's a question for you: Are the following word groups I found in a Belgian etymologist's work b OK ANY VALUE?

[^5]: a Moll and Melchior (see this volume, pp. 533-34). - b H.J. Chavée, Essai d'étymologie philosophique ou Recherches sur l'origine et les variations des mots qui expriment les actes intellectuels et moraux.





**[p. 541]**

Sanskrit Wer (couvrir, protéger, respecter, honorer, aimer, chérir3), adjective Wertas (EXCELLENT, RESPECTABLE), Gothic Wairths, ANGLO-SAXON Weorth, English worth, Lithuanian werthas, Aleman- nic Werth.

Sanskrit Wertis, Latin virtus, Gothic Wairthi, Teutonic Werth. Sanskrit Wal (couvrir, fortifierb), valor, value. (???) Strohn is here. Arrived yesterday. Leaves for Bradford again tomorrow. Seems to me very much better. Also more PLUCKY now.

I and various other people here have collected so much for the two Solingen chaps' that only 2 more pounds are needed to enable them to leave for New York by sailing-vessel and not be completely broke on arrival there. I am also giving them a note for Dr Jacobi, by which means we shall discover what the modest little man is ABOUT.

Herewith a letter I have received from Liebknecht who also sent a piece from the Grenzboten about Lupus.d Liebknecht will by now have got my second letter containing a 'real consideration' (as Mr Patkul calls it in his secret despatchese).

The Russians would seem to be claiming Schleswig-Holstein for themselves under the heading of Oldenburg,619 and to be 'compensating' Prussia for it. This TRANSACTION WOULD BE TOO

A Dutch orientalist, Professor Dozy of Leyden, has brought out a book' to prove that 'Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are figments; that the Israelites were idolaters; that they carried round a "stone" in the " arke des Verbunds"g; that the tribe of Simeon (driven out under Saul) went to Mecca where they built a heathen temple and worshipped stones; that, after the release from Babylon, Ezra invented the myth of the creation up to and including Joshua, and also wrote laws and dogmas, thus paving the way for reform, monotheism, etc.'.

That's what they write and tell me from Holland; they also say that the book has created a great sensation among theologians there, particularly since Dozy is the most learned orientalist in Holland and, what's more—a professor at Leyden! Outside Germany at any rate (Renan, Colenso, Dozy, etc.) there is a remarkable anti-religious movement.

[^1]: CLEVER.

[^2]: a cover, protect, respect, honour, love, cherish - b cover, fortify - •' Moll and Melchior (see this volume, pp. 533-34, 540). - cl 'Eine Erinnerung an den Communis- ten Wolff, Die Grenzboten, 1864, I. Semester, 2. Band, pp. 398-400. - e J. R. von Patkul, Berichte an das Zaarische Cabinet in Moscou - f R. Dozy, De Israëlieten te Mekka. - s Ark of the Covenant

[^3]: 22*





**[p. 542]**

T h e children send you their love, and my wife asks me to d u n you for her chain.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

(You might let me have your 'PRIVATE ADDRESS' in case there should be ANYTHING else I want to communicate to you of a Saturday evening.)

Send me Ernest Jones's ADDRESS.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jqjg Published in English in full for the first time

327

MARX T O L I O N PHILIPS 6 7

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

London, 25 June 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Uncle,

In the enclosed note Eleanor herself thanks you for your photogram, which is as good as such shadow pictures can ever

[^1]: Very many thanks for your detailed letter. I know how onerous writing is for you on account of your eyes and, indeed, the last thing I expect is that you should answer every one of my letters. I was glad to see from what you wrote that you are physically fit, and that your equanimity has not been shaken by the revelations of Prof. Dozy.a However, since Darwin demonstrated that we are all descended from the apes, there is scarcely ANY SHOCK WHATEVER that could shake 'our ancestral pride'. That the Pentateuch b was concocted only after the return of the Jews from Babylonian captivity had already been pointed out by Spinoza in his Tractatus theologico-politicus.

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 541.- b the first five books of the Old Testament (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus. Numbers, and Deuteronomy)





**[p. 543]**

hope to be. The child had already placed 'her letter' on my desk some 3 or 4 days ago.

I have had a recurrence of FURUNCLES and only got rid of them a fortnight ago. Since my work was greatly impeded by this tiresome complaint—and, in addition, the doctor's orders precluded strenuous or prolonged mental work—I have, which will surprise you not a little, been speculating—partly in American FUNDS, but more especially in English stocks, which are springing up like mushrooms this year (in furtherance of every imaginable and unimaginable joint stock enterprise), are forced up to a quite unreasonable level and then, for the most part, collapse. In this way, I have made over £400 and, now that the complexity of the political situation affords greater scope, I shall begin all over again. It's a type of operation that makes small demands on one's time, and it's worth while running some risk in order to relieve the enemy of his money.

All is well, on the whole, with my family. The doctor wishes little Jenny to have a CHANGE OF AIR and, unless you or fate have any objection, I and my 3 daughters will descend upon you towards the end of the summer.

By now the fruitless outcome of the conference577 will have been made known ALL OVER EUROPE by telegraph. The only people in this diplomatic tragi-comedy who are imperturbably pursuing their former aims and playing a masterly game are les russes? On the one hand, they are reviving the Holy Alliance,511 chivvying the German oxen into war, and thus diverting the eyes of Europe from their own colossal successes in Poland and Circassia; on the other, they are inciting Denmark to resist and will, thanks to Mr Palmerston, eventually succeed in getting England to declare war in support of the Protocol of 1852M0 which, as documentary evidence has now shown, was dictated by Russia620! The English, who did not go to war for Poland although pledged to do so by the treaties of 1815 and who did not go to war for Circassia despite the fact that possession of the Caucasus assures Russian hegemony in Asia, are to go to war and — I THINK IT PROBABLE—will go to war, for a treaty dictated by Russia, while that same Russia officially sides with the opponents of that very treaty! C'est incroyable ! b There's not a vestige of sympathy for Denmark amongst the English people (although, needless to say, antipathy and to spare for Prussia and Austria); it proved impossible to hold ONE SINGLE PUBLIC MEETING in support of the Danes; the fund started by

[^1]: •' ihe Russians - b It is unbelievable!





**[p. 544]**

Between 19 and 21 June Copenhagen was on the brink of revolution. The kinga had received a Russian despatch advising him to declare himself in favour of a personal union of the Duchies with THE DANISH CROWN. The king, a creature of the Russians (who placed his son b in Athens, his daughter c in England, and himself on the Danish throne), came out in favour of the Russian proposal, which was opposed by his minister, Monrad. Only after a two-day debate, Monrad's resignation and demonstrations IN THE STREETS OF COPENHAGEN, did the brand-new KING draw in his horns, BUT IN THIS WAY RUSSIA HAS AGAIN SHOWN THE CLOVEN FOOT. Quite apart, by the by, from its being in Russia's specific interest that the war should continue and spread, it is in her general interest that the peoples of Europe, of whom she is the common foe, should bloody each other's heads. The AIRS Prussia gives herself—handsome William as WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR—are comical. This pomp and circumstance will come to a sudden and sticky end.

T o give you an idea of what the GOOD Palmerston is like, I enclose with The Morning Post (Palmerston's private monitor) a cutting of a speech made by Ferrand during a parliamentary debate/ It is concerned solely with the appointment of a CHARITY INSPECTOR. From the passages I have marked, you will see the sort of things that are said to Pam's face in Parliament but without ever penetrating his hippopotamus's hide.

Warmest regards to THE WHOLE FAMILY. My wife also sends her regards to you AND FAMILY.

Ch. Marx First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in the International Review of Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Published in English in full for the Assen, 1956 f,rst t l m e

[^1]: I deliberately avoided seeing Garibaldi DURING HIS STAY AT London." I wouldn't mind visiting him at Caprera, but here in London HE SERVED ONLY AS A PEG FOR EVERY SELF-IMPORTANT FOOL TO HANG HIS carte de visite UPON.

[^2]: YOURS TRULY,

[^3]: a Christian IX - b William - c Alexandra - d W. Ferrand's speech in the House of Commons on 16 June 1864, The Morning Post, No. 28238, 17 June 1864. - c See this volume, pp. 516, 518.





**[p. 328]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 July 1864

DEAR Frederick,

Did you get the letter I sent you ABOUT 2 WEEKS ago, with the enclosure from Liebknecht, etc.? a

No answer yet from Eisner.621

I've been taking medicine again for ABOUT 10 days, and today have got a species of INFLUENZA as well. Hence NOT ABLE TO-DAY FOR

BETTER WRITING.

THANKS FOR Dagbladet. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 10,13 Published in English for the first time

329

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 4 July 1864

O n 3 June you wrote and told me that you would be SETTLING the business of the money with Borchardt the following day.b I have 3 reasons for wishing the thing to be settled:

1. Because of Borchardt; 2. I do not know by what r u m o u r (perhaps deriving from Germany, Trier) I have come to be known as a 'legatee'. It's

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR Frederick,

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 540-42.- b See this volume, p. 535.





**[p. 546]**

fantastic what bills I've been sent, dating back to ANCIENT TIMES {Neue Rheinische Zeitung included). 3. Had I had the money during the past 10 days, I'd have made a great deal of money on the Stock Exchange here. T h e time has come again when, with WIT and VERY LITHE MONEY, it's possible to make money in London.

For these reasons I'd like the business to be settled, after deduction, OF COURSE, from my share of the sums required for duties and other outgoings—to the LAWYER, etc.

Y o u WILL MUCH OBLIGE ME BY SETTLING THESE THINGS BEFORE Ju LY 1 5 . Y O U ITl USt excuse me for bothering you in view of your CHARGE OF BUSINESS, BUT

THERE ARE VERY SERIOUS INTERESTS AT STAKE.

Many thanks for settling the Freiligrath affair.3 Is the portrait he sent you the sinister Faustian one little Jenny has got in her album?

My wife, who attended an auction to buy the things she still required, has purchased a sturdy CARVING KNIFE AND FORK for you and will send them off today. I had told h e r there were none in your household.

Greetings from the EMPEROR OF CHINA b et cie.

Your

K. M.

My nose, mouth, etc., still bunged u p with influenza so that I can neither smell nor taste.

During this time, being utterly incapable of work, have read Carpenter, Physiology, Lord, ditto, Kölliker, Gewebelehre, Spurz- heim, The Anatomy of the Brain and the Nervous System, and Schwann and Schleiden, on the cells business.c In Lord's Popular Physiology, there's a good critique of phrenology, although the chap's religious. One passage recalls Hegel's Phenomenology; it reads:

As you know, 1. I'm always late off the mark with everything, and 2. I invariably follow in your footsteps. So it's probable that I

[^1]: *'They attempt to break up the mind into a number of supposed original faculties, such as no metaphysician will, for a moment, admit; and the brain into an equal number of organs, which the anatomist in vain asks to be shown, and then proceed to attach one of the former unadmitted suppositions as a mode of action to one of the latter undemonstrated existences.'*

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 548.- h Marx's daughter Jenny - c Th. Schwann, Microscopical Researches into the Accordance in the Structure and Growth of Animals and Plants; M. J. Schleiden, Contribution to Phylogenesis.



shall now devote much of my spare time to anatomy and PHYSIOLOGY and, in addition, attend lectures (where there will be practical demonstrations and dissection).

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, io,j3 Published in English for the first time

330

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 5 July 1864

Dear Moor,

When I wrote to you on 3 June, saying I would settle the business of the money on the 4th ,a this can only have related to the money in the bank, about which I did actually make arrangements straight away. It didn't occur to me that you would want any more money for the present, and we had in fact agreed that you would write and say if you did wish to have any more; hence I simply left it on deposit with that philistine Steinthal, who does, after all, pay 5%.

But to SETTLE the matter of the legacy from the 3rd to the 4th of June would have been promising more than I or anyone else could do. I believe I also wrote and told you that this might be a fairly lengthy business, depending as it did on all sorts of legal formalities (ADVERTISING a request to Lupus's undeclared creditors, payment of estate duty, etc.) which can't be hurried along. However, I'll leave no stone unturned to wind up the affair quickly.

But this is not, of course, to say you won't get an approximate share of the bequest as soon as you want it. You'll be getting a minimum of £600—I hope more—so we'll be able to send you another £350 or so, and I shall see to it that you actually get it this week. I shall also badger Borchardt to send in his bill, for this is partly why much still remains to be settled.

If only you'd dropped me a couple of lines before now, I should have been able to procure the £350 for you at any time, i.e. within

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 535.



a day or two. Today I can't do anything. I've been slaving away at the office all day, arguing with lawyers and G. Ermen (the DEED OF PARTNERSHIP isn't ready yet, and until then G. E. refuses to recognise my right to act as a partner270), on top of which I've had Dronke here. Now it's nearly 7 o'clock, and I've still had no DINNER, nor have I yet finished work. So you see how things are. Many regards.

Your

F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English lor the first time

331

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

[London,] 12 July 1864 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park Dear Freiligrath,

I got a letter today (just now) on which the address would appear to be written in your hand. If that is so, I should like to know how the letter reached you? It is from that blackguard Brass (in Berlin) who has the impudence to ask me to forward a scrawl to Biscamp.622 Having lost sight of that vagabond Biscamp years ago, I have, moreover, no idea how to rid myself of the scrawl, since the creature's WHEREABOUTS are not known to me.

I am writing from my bed, having had to take to it for several days because of what was a very dangerous carbuncle. This damned complaint keeps incessantly cropping up again.

On the 15th inst. I shall send Lenchen to you bearing £30, returned with many thanks—if, that is, I am not myself capable, though I think I shall be, of betaking myself between now and the

15th (inclusive) to the City, where I have other business to attend to.

Salut.

Your

[^1]: K. M. First published in the notes in F. Mehr- ing, The Freiligrath-Marx Correspondence, Moscow-Leningrad, 1929 (in Russian)

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 332]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

Ramsgate, 25 July 1864 46 Hardres Street

Dear Frederick,

You will see from the address that I am spending a few days in Ramsgate.

It was a far from agreeable surprise to discover that my FURUNCLE was in fact an extremely malignant CARBUNCLE and, what is more, has had the impudence to erupt just above my penis. So, for ABOUT 10 days, I've been obliged to spend most of my time in bed—and in this heat, too! The thing is clearing up pretty quickly here; however, my confidence has completely evaporated now that the disease has unexpectedly cropped up again in such a malignant form.

Jenny and Tussy are here with me; Laura is coming the day after tomorrow and in ABOUT 8 or 10 days we shall go to Holland, during which time my wife will betake herself to the seaside.

Apropos. Don't forget to send the latter her chain, as she will need this for her watch when at the resort. She says all you have to do is put it in a little box and have it posted, so sending it off couldn't possibly put you to much trouble.

As for the Schleswig-Holstein affair, I'm not yet wholly convinced that it won't end in a personal union between the Duchies and Denmark. The jealousy between Prussia and Austria and that felt by both towards the German Confederation, as well as the quarrel between Augustenburgb and Russia's pretender, Oldenburg,' etc., mean that such a solution is still at least a possibility, even at this late hour. Incidentally, as far back as 1851, Palmerston put forward the Duke of Oldenburgd en passant and as a pis aller" as candidate for Schleswig-Holstein.

I shall write and tell Laura to send you The Free Press. Your philistine on the spree lords it here as do, to an even

[^1]: I hope you have now sorted things out with Ermen and are no longer being BOTHERED by LAWYERS.3

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 548. - b Friedrich of Augustenburg - ' Peter Nikolaus Friedrich, Grand Duke of Oldenburg - d August Paul Friedrich - e last resort





**[p. 550]**

greater extent, his better half and his female OFFSPRING. It is almost sad to see venerable Oceanus, that age-old Titan, having to suffer these pigmies to disport themselves on his phiz, and serve them for entertainment.

BEST COMPLIMENTS from Jenny and Tussy. Life at the seaside suits both of them admirably. Addio.

Moor First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, (QJ3 Published in English for the first time

333

MARX TO LION PHILIPS239

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

London, 17 August 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Uncle,

I found your letter waiting for me here when I came back from the British Museum yesterday evening. It was already too late for me to reply straight away. I need not tell you how alarmed I and all the family were by the contents of your letter.623 One thing we failed to understand. Why didn't you leave the house instantly with Nettchena? I would advise you to do so even now. When the same thing happened in my family, I immediately sent the children away; and the giantessb can be nursed perfectly well without you. Why court danger unnecessarily? You will forgive me for interfering, but I feel too worried about you TO MINCE MATTERS. In fact, I am sorry that I am not with you in person, for this disease has no effect upon me, as I know from experience and, had you really insisted on not leaving the house (BUT WHY NOT?), I could have stood by you at this time of crisis, for in such crises two are better able than one, and three better able than two, TO KILL TIME AND ROUGH

I have written to Nettchen about our own recent doings,42 and she will pass on to you what little is worth mentioning. On the

[^1]: IT.

[^2]: 11 Antoinette Philips - h a servant in the Philips household





**[p. 1956]**

whole, things are going quite well here and all members of the family are reasonably fit.

Just now there's a political and social lull here. Everyone who can, makes off, either abroad or to seaside resorts in this country. T h e monotony is broken only by daily reports of terrible RAILWAY ACCIDENTS. Capital over here isn't as much subject to police supervision as on the Continent, and hence it's of no concern whatever to the RAILWAY DIRECTORS HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE KILLED DURING AN EXCURSION SEASON, IF ONLY THE BALANCE LOOKS TO THE COMFORTABLE SIDE. All attempts to make these RAILWAY kings responsible for their HOMICIDAL NEGLECT OF ALL PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES have hitherto come to grief as a result of the great influence exerted by the RAILWAY INTEREST in the HOUSE OF COMMONS.

Another source of distraction over here is the ANXIETY PREVAILING IN MERCANTILE CIRCLES BECAUSE OF THE RISE OF THE RATE OF DISCOUNT! I t is C e r t a i n that, if the present RATE OF DISCOUNT remains at its present high for a few more weeks, there will be a great CRASH among the myriads of SWINDLING JOINT STOCK COMPANIES, which have been springing u p like mushrooms this year. Already, here and there in the CITY a major bankruptcy heralds the approaching storm.

I recently had an opportunity of looking at a very important scientific work, Grove's Correlation of Physical Forces. H e demon- strates that mechanical motive force, heat, light, electricity, magnetism and CHEMICAL AFFINITY are all in effect simply modifica- tions of the same force, and mutually generate, replace, merge into each other, etc. With great skill he dismisses such odious metaphysical-physical phantasms as 'latent heat' (as good as 'invisible light'), electric 'fluid' and similar verbal pis aller* which come in handy as understudies in place of ideas.

I hope to have good tidings of you soon. So much am I taken u p with thoughts of you that I a m unable to compose myself sufficiently to read the important AMERICAN NEWS today.

Your affectionate nephew

K. M.

[^1]: T h e whole family send their warmest regards. Kindly remember me to Jettchen, the doctor, Fritz b et cie.

[^2]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in International Review of Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen,

[^3]: 11 last resort - h Henriette Sophia van Anrooij, Antonie Johannes Wouters van Anrooij, Friedrich Philips





**[p. 334]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 31 August 1864

DEAR Frederick,

I returned from Ramsgate3 exactly three weeks ago today. The trip to Holland has fallen through, because a maid in my uncle's15

household suddenly contracted smallpox.

Last week my wife had a severe attack of cholerine which did, for a spell, look like becoming dangerous. Yesterday she left for Brighton (solo).

I have sundry letters from Liebknecht here which, however, I shall not send as I don't know whether you are in Manchester. The enclosed scrawl by Colletc will amuse you, and, should you not be there, it doesn't really matter. What naïveté on C.'s part! Since (to use an Austrian construction) I had done a long article on the RUSSIAN CLAIMS for him, which he didn't print, he expects me to take an interest in his ridiculous rubbish.

I've been operative again for a couple of days. Before that I was still troubled with sickness and INCAPABLE. If you haven't left yet, let us know at once. We hope to see you on your way through at any rate. The children send you their love. Jenny can hardly wait to show you her GREENHOUSE.

I haven't yet quite made up my mind about the Schleswig- Holstein affair, and more facts will be needed before a clear picture can be gained of it. You were right when you predicted the rebirth of the Holy Alliance.e Bonaparte would seem to have a strong 'inclination AT LEAST' to make 'a fourth in the alliance'.1 Since the outbreak of the Polish revolution to date, the utter despicability of the fellow has Manifested itself in the clearest and most genuine light.624

[^1]: The enclosed letter from Eisner is in reply to my wife's asking him for biographical notes on Lupus.d

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 549. - b Lion Philips - c Marx apparently means the item [C. D. Collet,] 'Groundlessness of Any Claim of Russia to Holstein-Gottorp' in The Free Press, Vol. XII, No. 5, 4 May 1864. - d See this volume, pp. 588-89.- e See this volume, pp. 505-06.- f Paraphrase of a passage from Schiller's ballad Die Bürgschaft.





**[p. 553]**

I've had an opportunity of looking at Grove's Correlation of Physical Fqrces. He is beyond doubt the most philosophical of the English (and indeed German!) natural scientists. Our friend Schleiden has an inborn- proclivity for fadaise,3 although he, by mistake, discovered the cell.

Herewith) Pieper's card.625 It accidentally fell into Liebknecht's hands and he has returned it to me.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Be so good as to send me Ernest Jones's Manchester address.

DON'T FORGET!

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, i g j ^ Published in English for the first time

335

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 2 September 1864

Dear Moor,

I had assumed from your last letterb that you'd be in the depths of the Dutch fens, hence my pertinacious silence. I couldn't find your address in Holland. I sent your wife the watch and chain on 6 August, in a box, by registered mail, and trust it arrived safely.

I intend to travel from Hull to Hamburg next Thursday, the 8th, or Saturday, the 10th September, in order to take a look at OUR NEW PROPERTY in Schleswig and Holstein and shall, provided there are no passport difficulties, also go from Lübeck to Copenhagen. I shall not be returning before the end of September and, if at all feasible, shall spend a day in London on the way back.

The PARTNERSHIP business has at last been settled, and the contracts signed,1 so I hope to have 5 years' peace from that direction.

We have left our house in Tennant Street626 and have been living for the past fortnight about 500 paces further along, in a

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a inanity - ]i See this volume, p. 549.- c ibid., p. 548.





**[p. 554]**

somewhat larger house with 2 living-rooms downstairs; thus we have bettered ourselves after much the same fashion as you did by your last removal. The address is 86 Mornington Street, Stockport Road, Manchester. Letters to be addressed to me by name as before.

Jones's address is 52 Cross Street, Manchester. The Danes still believe, or rather fear, that a personal union will be established and, since editors Bille, of the Dagbladet, and Ploug, of the Faedrelandet, are both deputies and undoubtedly have good sources, and, since the present ministers are also good Russians, I feel convinced that powerful intrigues towards that end are being conducted by Russia. However, Monsieur Bismarck certainly has other things in view and, if he is to gain positive advantages, i.e. if he is to mediatise Schleswig-Holstein,027 I think he will need the Augustenburg chap3 pretty badly. This much is certain, never has Prussian dynastic policy involving the partition of Germany along the Main been so insolently advocated, and as for the rotten liberal gang, they seem to be taking quite kindly to it. Should this be the case—and I shall find out easily enough in Germany—the Prussian bourgeoisie will be giving us a tremendous lever for the next SET-TO. I am sure by the way that Eisner is right, at least about the old provinces628 being intolerably flushed with victory. Indeed, I shall take care not to go there. It will be bad enough even on the Rhine.

To the worthy Gottfried's1' intense alarm, I told him about Monsieur Bonaparte's ardent desire to join the Holy Alliance0 on the very day the matter became known. The fellow's bound to come to a bad end. To ruminate perpetually about 'business' is very aging, as I can see from Gottfried, who has much the same attitude to trade as B. has to politics, and whose train of thought is also similar. As the years go by, one dreams of retirement and, if it's not feasible, one's health suffers. N'est pas Palmerston qui veut.6'29

Ce cher1' Bonaparte is, I should say, very much ON THE DECLINE. SO much the better; once he starts to flag, he'll soon be done for.

Best wishes to the girls. But why didn't you drop me a couple of lines to say you were not going to Holland and that your wife was ill? Your

[^1]: F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgj3 ' Published in English for the first time a Friedrich of Augustenburg - h Gottfried Ermen - r See this volume, p. 552. - d That dear





**[p. 336]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 September 1864

Dear Frederick,

Yesterday afternoon I received a letter from Freiligrath, of which copy below; from it you will see that Lassalle has been gravely wounded in a duel in Geneva. I went to see Freiligr. that same evening. However, he had not received any more telegrams. Incidentally, he told me—entre nous"—that his bank was in a state of crisis, aggravated by the affair in Geneva and the role Fazy had played in the same.630

Salut.

Your

K. M.b

[^1]: Dear Marx,

[^2]: 'I have just had a letter from Klapka in Geneva, containing the sad news that, on 30 August, Lassalle fought a duel in Geneva with a Wallachian pseudo-princec and was mortally wounded. Herewith the details from K.'s letter

[^3]: '"Lassalle had been conducting a love-affair here, though with perfectly honourable intentions as he wished to marry the girl,d the daughter of the Bavarian envoy, von Dönniges. The father objected to the marriage, the girl deceived poor Lassalle; a man to whom she had been previously engaged, the above-mentioned pseudo-prince, arrived from Berlin; then came explanations, an unpleasant exchange of letters, and a challenge ensued. Lassalle's seconds were Colonel Riistow and my fellow countryman, General Count Bethlen. Lassalle, as befitted a man of his reputation and political position, behaved with no less courage than dignity. He was shot in the stomach and is now laid up at the Hôtel Victoria with his life hanging in the balance. Unfortunately for him, the bullet is lodged deep in the body, so the wound might well become gangrenous. I went to see him at once upon my arrival and iounc. him dictating his will, but otherwise calm and resigned to death. I am exceeding"; sorry for him; often one does not get to know a person until his end is neai ,u tern.;.

[^4]: a between ourselves - b There follows the text of Frc IJ„ handwriting in the original (see also p. 557). - c J. von 1", < Dönniges





**[p. 6]**

Let us hope that, despite the doctors' unfavourable prognoses, he will come safely through the crisis."

'So much for Klapkâ.'

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Mane, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, joj3 Published in English for the first time

337

MARX TO JENNY MARX239

IN BRIGHTON

[London,] 2 September 1864

Dear Jenny,

Yesterday I got a letter from Freiligrath—copy below—from which you will see that Lassalle has been gravely wounded in a duel in Geneva. We were genuinely dismayed by the news since, whatever one may say, L. is too good to go under in this way. After receiving the letter, I went to see Freiligrath, i.e. at his private address, knowing that Ida" was away. He seemed very 'agreeably' surprised by my visit. His daughter Louise was with him. The rest of the crew are coming back at the end of this week. Louise had been staying in Brighton for a fortnight with Franziska Rüge. Bearing in mind the Freilig.-Ruge, etc., connection, you should take care with your baroness's cards.b Ruge would be just the fellow to turn something like that to account.

Freilig. was by no means as 'moved' as he made out in his letter, but cracked his little jokes as always, even on the subject of L. He told me that his bank was in a state of crisis and that the Geneva affair in particular and the role played therein by Fazy were doing it a great deal of harm.630 Finally, here is Tussy's LAST. It being plain from F.'s letter that L. had fought a duel on account of a ladyc he wished to marry, Laura recalled how he told every woman he could 'only love her for 6 weeks'. So, says Tussy, 'HE IS WARRANTED FOR

[^1]: WEEKS'.

[^2]: a Ida Freiligrath - b Jenny Marx had visiting cards which read, 'Mme Jenny Marx,

[^3]: née Baronesse von Westphalen'. - c Helene von Dönniges



Little Jenny is working like mad in her GREENHOUSE. All are well and send their love.

THE OLD ONE

F.'s letter3

'I have just had a letter from Klapka in Geneva. He writes: '"Lassalle had been conducting a love-affair here, though with perfectly honourable intentions as he wished to marry the girl, the daughter of the Bavarian envoy, Mr von Dönniges. The father objected to the marriage, the girl deceived poor Lassalle; a man to whom she had been previously engaged, the above-mentioned pseudo-prince,b arrived from Berlin; then came explanations, an upleasant exchange of letters, and a challenge ensued. Lassalle's seconds were Colonel Rüstow and my fellow countryman, General Count Bethlen. Lassalle, as befitted a man of his reputation and political position, behaved with no less courage than dignity. He was shot in the stomach and is now laid up at the Hôtel Victoria with his life hanging in the balance. Unfortunately for him, the bullet is lodged deep in the body, so the wound might well become gangrenous. I went to see him at once upon my arrival and found him dictating his will, but otherwise calm and resigned to death. I am exceedingly sorry for him; often one does not get to know a person until his end is near at hand. Let us hope that, despite the doctors' unfavourable prognoses, he will come safely through the crisis."

'So much for Klapka. I cannot but confess' (what an affected way of putting it—as though he was on the rack!) 'that I was deeply affected by the news and immediately telegraphed Klapka, asking him to convey my sympathy and grief to Lassalle, if he should still be alive. Klapka will reply by telegraph and I shall immediately pass on to you anything I learn.'

[^1]: First published, in the language of the original (German), in Annali, an. I, Milan, 1958

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: 11 The copy of the letter is in Marx's handwriting. - h J. von Racowita





**[p. 338]**

ENGELS TO MARX369

IN LONDON

Manchester, 4 September 1864 86 Mornington Street, Stockport Road

Dear Moor,

Your telegram631 arrived yesterday even before I had opened your letter, my attention having first been claimed by all kinds of business. You can imagine how surprised I was by the news. Whatever Lassalle may have been in other respects as a person, writer, scholar—he was, as a politician, undoubtedly one of the most significant men in Germany. For us he was a very uncertain friend now and would, in future, most certainly have been our enemy; but nevertheless, it's very galling to see how Germany destroys all those in the extreme party who are in any way worth their salt. What jubilation there will be amongst the manufacturers and amongst the Progress swine, for L. was indeed the only man actually inside Germany of whom they were afraid.

But what an extraordinary way to lose one's life: To go and fall seriously in love with a Bavarian envoy's daughter"—this WOULD-BE Don Juan—, ask for her hand, clash with an ex-rival,b not to say Wallachian swindler, and get himself shot dead by the same. Such a thing could only happen to L., with his strange and altogether unique mixture of frivolity and sentimentality, Jewishness and chivalresquerie. How could a political man like him exchange shots with a Wallachian adventurer?

You can see with what speed the news travelled from the fact that his death had already been announced on Thursday evening in the Kölnische Zeitung, which arrived here at midday yester- day0— 2 hours after your telegram.

What do you think of things in America? Lee is making masterly use of his fortified camp at Richmond, and small wonder, this being already the third campaign to revolve around it.632 He is pinning down Grant's massive force with comparatively few men and is employing the better part of his own troops for offensive action in West Virginia and as a threat to Washington and

[^1]: a Helene von Dönniges - b J. von Racowifa - c Saturday





**[p. 559]**

Pennsylvania. A first-class object-lesson for the Prussians, who could learn from it down to the last detail how to conduct a campaign centred upon the fortified camp of Coblenz, but who are, of course, far too arrogant to learn anything from these improvised generals. Grant—discharged from the army for drunkenness 6 years ago when a lieutenant, subsequently a bibulous engineer in St. Louis—has much UNITY OF PURPOSE and considerable contempt for the lives of his cannon-fodder; he would also seem to be very resourceful as a small-scale strategist (i.e. day-to-day operations), but I look in vain for any signs that he has enough breadth of vision to be able to survey the campaign as a whole. It seems to me that the campaign against Richmond is on the point of collapse; the impatience with which G. is attacking now in one place now in another, but nowhere proceeding methodically with saps and mines is a bad sign. Altogether, so far as the Yankees are concerned, the engineering branch would seem to be in a poor state; for this calls, not only for theoretical knowledge, but also for a tradition of practice which cannot be readily improvised.

Whether Sherman will cope with Atlanta seems doubtful, but his chances are, I think, rather better.633 Skirmishing by guerrillas and cavalry to his rear are unlikely to do him much harm. The fall of Atlanta would be a hard blow for the South, Rome would fall at the same time and that's where their gun foundries, etc., are; in addition, the railway connection between Atlanta and South Carolina would be lost.

Farragut is the same as always. The fellow knows what he's about. But whether Mobile itself will fall is very doubtful. The town is very strongly fortified and can, so far as I know, only be taken from the landward side, since vessels of deep draught can't approach near enough. But how stupid to split up the attacking forces on the coast, where Charleston and Mobile are being attacked simultaneously instead of one after the other, but each time with all available forces.

I don't set much store by the peace-talk that is now so prevalent. Not even by the negotiations allegedly conducted direct by Lincoln. All this I regard as an electioneering ploy. As things now stand, I should say that Lincoln's re-election is fairly certain.634

My mother is at Ostende and will be going home again on Saturday," as a result of which news I have changed my travelling arrangements'5 and shall be leaving for Ostende on Thursday

[^1]: 11 September - b See this volume, p. 553.





**[p. 560]**

evening. I'm afraid I shall only be able to catch the night train to London which gets in before 6 a.m. But, if I can manage it, I shall take the 4.15, thus getting to Euston station at 9.15, when I shall either go straight on to Dover (s'il y a moyen"), or spend the night at the hotel at London Bridge Station. If the latter, I shall write to you beforehand, in which case we might be able to meet.635

Meanwhile, write and tell me what you think about America. Best wishes to the GIRLS.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1013 Published in English in full for the first time

339

MARX TO ENGELS369

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 September 1864

During the past few days my thoughts have been damnably preoccupied with Lassalle's misfortune. After all, whatever else he may have been, he was one of the vieille soucheh and the foe of our foes. And then the thing came so unexpectedly that it's hard to believe so noisy, STIRRING, PUSHING a person is now dead as a door-nail and compelled to hold his tongue ALTOGETHER. AS regards the cause of his death, you are perfectly right.c It is one of the many indiscretions he committed in the course of his life. WITH ALL THAT, I am sorry that our relationship should have been clouded in recent years, though the fault lay with him. On the other hand, I am very glad that I resisted every incitement from whatever quarter and never attacked him during his 'year of triumph'.636

Heaven knows, our ranks are being steadily depleted, and there are no reinforcements in sight. I'm convinced, by the by, that this catastrophe would never have happened had L. not consorted with MILITARY ADVENTURERS and révolutionnaires en gants jaunesd in Switzer-

[^1]: DEAR FREDERICK,

[^2]: a if it can be done - b old stock - c See this volume, p. 558.- d kid-glove re- volutionaries



land. But he was fatalement drawn again and again to this Coblenz of European revolution.637

The 'Bavarian envoy's daughter'3 is none other than the daughter of Dönniges of Berlin, a fellow university demagogue638

of Rutenberg and co.'s, originally one of that little weed Ranke's jeunesh GENTS—or rather, since they were no GENTLEMEN, jeunes gensc—whom he got to edit beastly old German imperial annals,d

etc. What that capering little troll Ranke regarded as wit—playful anecdotalism and the attribution of all great events to mean and petty origins—was strictly forbidden these YOUNG MEN FROM THE COUNTRY. They were supposed to stick to what was 'objective' and leave wit to their master 1 Our friend Dönniges was regarded as something of a rebel, since he contested Ranke's monopoly of wit, in deed if not word, and showed ad oculose in various ways that he, no less than Ranke, was a born 'valet' of 'history'.639

Well, I wonder what will become of the organisation built up by L.640 Herwegh, that platonic friend of 'labour' and practical friend of the 'Muses', isn't the right man. In general, none of its lesser leaders are anything but RUBBISH. According to what Liebknecht writes, the Schulze-Delitzsch Association in Berlin641 can now boast no more than 40 MEMBERS. HOW things stand over there is clear from the fact that our Wilhelm Liebkn. is A CONSEQUENTIAL POLITICAL PERSONAGE. Should L.'s death lead fellows like Schulze, etc., to make insolent remarks about the deceased, we can only hope that L.'s official supporters conduct themselves in such a way as to enable us to enter the lists IF NECESSARY. I must now find out who has his correspondence. I shall at once obtain an INJUNCTION—for already the mob of memoir vultures such as Ludmilla,' etc., are circling round these literary remains—prohibiting the publication of a single line of mine or yours. If necessary, this can be legally enforced in Prussia.

So far as America is concerned, I consider the present moment, entre nous,s to be extremely critical. If Grant suffers a major defeat, or Sherman wins a major victory, so ALL RIGHT. Just now, at election time, a chronic series of small CHECKS would be dangerous. I fully agree with you that, to date, Lincoln's re-election is pretty well assured, still 100 to l.h But election time in a country which is

[^1]: a Helene von Dönniges (see this volume, p. 558) * b young- c young men - d Jahrbücher des Deutschen Reichs unter dem Sächsischen Hause. Herausgegeben von Leopold Ranke, Bd. 1-3, Berlin, 1837-1840. - e patently - f Ludmilla Assing - 8 between ourselves - h See this volume, pp. 559-60.



the archetype of democratic humbug is full of hazards that may quite unexpectedly defy the logic of events (an expression which Magnus Urquhartus considers no less idiotic than 'THE JUSTICE OF A LOCOMOTIVE'). An armistice would seem to be quite essential to the South, if it is to be saved from complete prostration. It was the first to raise this CRY, not only in its northern organs, but actually in those of Richmond, although, now that the said cry has evoked an echo in New York, the Richmond Examiner is scornfully tossing it back to the Yankees.312 It is altogether symptomatic that Mr Davis should have decided to treat Negro soldiers as 'prisoners of war'—the last official order of his war secretary.11

Lincoln has at his disposal considerable means for achieving election. (Needless to say, the peace proposals made by him are MERE HUMBUG.) The election of an opposition candidate would probably lead to a genuine revolution. Nevertheless, there is no mistaking the fact that during the next 8 weeks, in the course of which the matter will be decided pro tern, much will depend on military eventualities. This is undoubtedly the most critical moment since the beginning of the war. Once this has been SHIFTED, OLD LINCOLN CAN BLUNDER ON to his heart's content. The old man, by the by, cannot possibly 'create' generals. He'd be better able to select ministers. Yet the CONFEDERATE PAPERS attack their ministers just as the Yankees do those in Washington. Should Lincoln succeed this time—as is highly probable—it will be on a far more radical PLATFORM and in completely CHANGED CIRCUMSTANCES. Then the old man will, lawyer-fashion, find that more radical methods are compatible with his conscience.

I hope to see you tomorrow! Regards to Madame Liz.b

Herewith a photograph of Laura. I am hourly awaiting that of Jenny, but it has not, alas, arrived yet. Salut OLD BOY.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a James Alexander Seddon - b Lizzy Burns





**[p. 340]**

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT239

IN BERLIN

London, 12 September 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My Dear Countess,

You will realise how surprised, dismayed and shocked I was by the utterly unexpected news of Lassalle's death. He was one of the people by whom I set great store. For me it is all the more distressing in that of late we had no longer been in touch. The reason for this was neither his silence alone—for it was he who was the instigator, not I — nor my own illness, which lasted over a year and of which I only rid myself a few days ago. There were also reasons which I could tell you by word of mouth but not in writing. Let me assure you that no one can feel greater sorrow over Lassalle's untimely end than I. And, above all else, I feel for you. I know how much the deceased meant to you and what his loss must mean. One thing you can be glad of. He died young, at a time of triumph, as an Achilles.

I hope, my dear Countess, that your proud and courageous spirit will enable you to withstand this blow fate has dealt you, and that you will never doubt the wholly loyal devotion of

Your sincere friend,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Printed according to the original Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart- Berlin, 1922





APPENDICES



