---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "303. Engels to Marx. 3 January "
Page_Range: "542-544"
---

# 303. Engels to Marx. 3 January 



**[p. 505]**

1 8 6 4

303

ENGELS TO MARX

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

Manchester, 3 January 1864

Dear Moor,

The many CHRISTMAS drinking-sprees and consequent GENERAL UNFITNESS FOR BUSINESS have rendered me utterly incapable of replying any sooner. However, the affair is now happily over.

I am sending your wife the amount in question/ For the rest, I'm delighted to hear that your second carbuncle has been operated on, and that you are thus over this latter crisis. You'll have got damned thin as a result of this tedious business.

The Schleswig-Holstein affair has come off the rails again good and proper. If, as I believe, there's war in the spring, we shall have Denmark, Sweden, France and Italy against us and, possibly, England. In Hungary and Poland Plonplonism,524 to which Kossuth had already pointed the way, is in full swing.567 I see only two ways out here: 1. either revolution in Berlin as soon as the troops have left and, in Vienna, a corresponding movement with concessions of an adequate kind to Hungary and, perhaps, also to Poland. That's what would be most favourable, and there would be nothing to fear in such a case. But it is also what is most improbable, in view of the confusion that prevails. Or, alternative- ly, 2. a restoration of the Holy Alliance511 for which, as always, the partition of Poland would provide the cement (Russia has a greater interest in Poland than in Denmark and also the prospect, come the armistice, of having Austria and Prussia under her thumb, i.e. being able to impose her own conditions).

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 500-01.



The mock war in Schleswig under Wrangel can't last very long.568 In the first place, the Danish fortifications will make even tlie initial encounters too bloody and, in the second, Boustrapa 167

is too much in need of a popular war not to seize this opportunity. What more could he ask than the restoration of the Holy Alliance and a war for both Poland and the Rhine with, for good measure, England and Italy and all the small states of Europe on his side?

Apropos. Our worthy Faucher, who shows himself a rabid Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg man in the Chamber," is, at the same time, sending The Manchester Guardian anti-German articles in which he arse-licks to the English bastards of The Times. Shouldn't one do something to unmask this louse?

If the curs in the Prussian Chamber were now to take their courage in both hands, they could straighten things out to their own satisfaction within the space of 6 weeks. Handsome William's reply shows what a fix the government is in.569 No one will fork out, not even the worthy von der Heydt, and they know they won't get any money par force!'

Lupus has just come to pick me up and sends you his kindest regards.

Here's to a good recovery and a Happy New Year.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briejii'echsel z-anscken F. Engels und K. Marx, 1kl. 3, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a J. Faucher's speech in the Chamber of Deputies on 1 December 1863, reported in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 338, 4 December 1863. - b by force



