---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "305. Marx to Lion Philips. 20 February "
Page_Range: "545-548"
---

# 305. Marx to Lion Philips. 20 February 

The German petty princes are taking the fiction of the Schleswig-Holstein movement very seriously. They genuinely believe that Germania cannot have enough of them and is therefore intent on enthroning a 35th.c

I am writing you no more than a short letter, and that only with great effort, since it's agony for me to sit. But I shall expect an early reply from you; it CHEERS ME UP to see your handwriting.

Don't forget to enclose your photograph. I have promised my cousin as much, and how is she to believe in our Orestes-Pylades relationship, if I can't even commovered you to send a photograph? Address as before CARE OF Mr L. Philips.

Salut to yourself and Lupus.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

305

Dear Uncle,

I shall begin at the end. I arrived here yesterday ABOUT NOON in a frozen condition, FOR IT WAS DEVILISH COLD. My reception was all the warmer, and thus I enjoyed the delights inseparable from a complete contrast. En passant' yesterday and today were the coldest days there have been in London. So it seems I am fated to bring winter

[^1]: MARX TO LION PHILIPS239

[^2]: IN ZALT-BOMMEL

[^3]: London, 20 February [1864]e

[^4]: a The German phrase 'seine Pappenheimer kennen' (to know who one is dealing with) derives from Schiller's Wallensteins Tod. Ill, 15. - b Journal de Saint Pétersbourg, No. 293; 26, 27 and 28 December 1863 (7, 8 and 9 January 1864). - c See this volume, p. 503. - d induce - e Manuscript damaged. - f By the way



Our little childb *was quite enchanted by the really beautiful Dolly, Madame Augustc had chosen for her. I enclose some lines on the part of the child. She did not leave off bothering myself till I had promised her to enclose also for you a letter which she pretends to be written in Chinese characters and which an English friend has sent her.*

[In Amsterd]amd I found the whole family well and cheerful. [Augustc] was very busy and so I said [nothing] at all to him about financial matters. At the insurance office I was given thousand guilder notes, most of which I changed in Rotterdam, with Jacques'' help, into bills and ABOUT a quarter into BANKNOTES.

Nor, during the two days I was in Rotterdam, did Jacques have overmuch spare time. One day, he was pleading in a small town nearby and, the other, he had to attend a court of appraisal. On the whole, I should say that, since becoming engaged, he has had much more of AN EYE TO BUSINESS' than previously. I don't doubt that in a few years' time he will have a sound practice, the more so since he likes legal work. He himself told me that he wins nearly all his doubtful cases, and, if he goes to the trouble of telling one something like that, he can be taken at his word. He and I laughed a great deal about a man whom he describes as 'the client' par excellence. This man, he told me, was still young and, over the next 30 years OR MORE, might litigate away a lot more of his assets!

Incidentally, August also has a quite peculiar faith in the infallibility of the courts. He opines, for example, that the English lose nothing by the high cost of their legal procedure. People who didn't engage in litigation had just as much chance of obtaining justice as those who did. * In point of fact, it seemed his opinion that dear law is as good as cheap law, and perhaps better; and he is a fellow who knows something about such things.*

August gave me the 3 parts of the Aardrijkskunde? and, on top of that, Jacques provided me with a work on political economy (Dutch) by Vissering,h a professor at Leyden, and a copy of

[^1]: II Marx uses the Berlin dialectal form Untertanenbejeisterung instead of Untertanen- begeuterung. - h Eleanor Marx - c August Philips' wife - d Manuscript damaged. - '' August Philips - f Jacques Philips - K Geography - h S. Vissering, Handboek van

[^2]: praktische staathuishoudkunde.



Sorje Oppenheim^ which was already creating a great sensation in Amsterdam, has been performed here by my daughters to piano accompaniment * and they hope to perform it one day before their uncle*.

A great bundle of newspapers, etc., from various latitudes has accumulated for me here, *but I am firmly resolved to know nothing of politics until Monday next.

Now, my dear uncle, I bid you farewell. Despite carbuncles and furuncles, I consider the two months I have lived in your house, as one of the happiest episodes of my life, and I shall always feel thankful for the kindness you have shown me.

You will, of course, tell Rothhäuschenc that I send him my compliments and that I regret having been forced giving battle to him.

My best compliments to the whole family, especially Jettchen,d Dr Anrooij, and Fritz.e Mrs Marx and the girls also send their compliments. Please to give the enclosed lines to Netchen.f

Yours truly,

Charles M.*

[^1]: First published, in the languages of the Printed according to the original original (German and English), in the magazine International Review of Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956

[^2]: a Hildebrand, Camera obscura. - b A popular song - c Marx puns on the name of A. Roodhujzen. 'Rothhäusehen' means 'little red house'. - d Henriette Sophie van Anrooij - c Friedrich Philips - f Antoinette Philips



