---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "310. Marx to Engels. 19 April "
Page_Range: "553-555"
---

# 310. Marx to Engels. 19 April 



**[p. 516]**

You can see what a good Dutchman I've become from the fact that little Jenny has already read half the Camera obscura* and Laura, me docente,h a large part OF THE FIRST von ME OF THE Aardrijks- kunde,c while even Eleanor knows 'Dans Nonneken dans' and 'Klompertjen en zijn wijfjen"* by heart. Best compliments from THE WHOLE FAMILY to you, and Karl, not forgetting madame la générale." With the weather being so fine, you surely won't have overlong to wait for your own beau jour!

Your affectionate nephew,

Karl Marx

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in the magazine Inter- national Review of Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956

310

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 April 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

T h e furunculosis persisted until ABOUT a week ago, which made me very 'peevish' and it was not until a day or two since that I was able to start work again.

Garibaldi and 'Karl Blind'! What a talent for puffing himself u p the last-named hydrocephalous crab-louse displays! 'Mr Karl

[^1]: DEAR FREDERICK,

[^2]: This month, April the first's privilege of being ALL FOOLS DAY, has been extended, at least in London, to the whole of April. Garibaldi and Palmerston FOR EVER on the WALLS of London! 5 8 2 Garibaldi with Pam and Clanricarde, and extolled by the ENGLISH POLICEMEN, at the Crystal Palace!583 In England there aren't any mouchardsgl T h e Bandiera brothers would have something to say about that.584

[^3]: '•* by Hildebrand - b with me as tutor - ' Geography - d 'Dance, little nun, dance' and 'The shoe and his wife' (Dutch nursery rhymes) - e Probably the wife of Karl Philips' father-in-law, a general. - f fine day - s police spies





**[p. 1913]**

Blind', the Athenaeum announces, 'HAS JOINED THE SHAKESPEARE COMMIT- TEE!'585 T h e fellow doesn't understand one line of S. I had to put u p considerable resistance and have doubtless completely forfeited W e b e r V esteem. For the Workers' Society3 (incited by W.) wanted m« to compose an address to Gar., and then call on him with a deputation. I REFUSED FLATLY.

When are you going to come here? T h e family is expecting you. Tomorrow sees the start of the conference 5 7 7 that will cause the scales to fall from the Teutons' eyes. Collet has announced himself for Thursday b and, at the same time, sent me a whole LOT of German literature on the Schleswig-Holstein-Lauenburg mess. Tomorrow I shall have to get down to a serious study of this disagreeable affair so as to be ready with my answers for the fellow, who has the entire genealogy' 8 6 at his fingertips. You may have noticed that the wretched Disraeli has spared Pam the trouble of answering Osborne's and Kinglake's motions on Schleswig-Holstein at the impending conference. Yesterday, Dis- raeli gave notice that he would put the PREVIOUS QUESTION. In all the SERIOUS AFFAIRS of the past 2 or 3 years (e.g. the Afghanistan business297) he has extricated OLD Pam from the MUDDLE.

You will see how pitiful (I mean what a DONKEY) Garibaldi is—he has been half KILLED, incidentally, by John Bull's EMBRACE—from the following, which is not, OF COURSE, common knowledge.

At the secret revolutionaries' congress in Brussels (September 1863)—which had Garibaldi as its nominal CHIEF—it was decided that G. should go to London, but do so incognito and thus catch the metropolis unawares. He was then to COME OUT for Poland IN THE STRONGEST POSSIBLE WAY. Instead of that, the fellow goes and frater- nises with Pam! I'd rather be a louse in sheep's clothing than a man of such brave stupidity, as Shakespeare says in Troilus and Cressida.c

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Kindest regards to Lupus and Lizzy.d

[^2]: Little Jenny still has a cough but strikes me as being much better. T h e new house 3 8 7 has, IN FACT, cheered her u p a great deal.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engeh und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart,

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a Josef Valentin Weber - b 21 April 1864 - ' Act III. Scene 3 - d Lizzy Burns



