---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "314. Engels to Marx. 2 May , "
Page_Range: "559-560"
---

# 314. Engels to Marx. 2 May , 



**[p. 522]**

There is another consultation at 9 tomorrow morning which I shall also attend to see what he does. B. intends to get a male nurse for him today. If only the poor fellow pulls through!

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

314

ENGELS TO MARX492

IN LONDON

[Manchester, 2 May 1864] Monday evening 8.30

Dear Marx,

Lupus is going rapidly downhill. He's having hallucinations, keeps jumping out of bed, etc. What we're short of now is a man to sit up with him and stop him injuring himself. There is only one professional male nurse up here, and he is engaged. Admittedly, Borchardt could get hold of one from a nearby lunatic asylum, but so long as there is the slightest chance of recovery he doesn't, of course, want that kind of person, being anxious to avoid subsequent gossip and the harm it would do L. He now wonders whether you might perhaps have a reliable man, who doesn't need to be a nurse by profession, far better not, but is simply reliable in that he will do what he is told and not fall asleep—maybe you have such a man and can send him up here first thing tomorrow, for we are provided for only up till tomorrow and periculum in mora.* S'il s'en trouve,h send him at once to Borchardt, Rusholme Road, Manchester.

[^1]: a there is danger in delay - b If one is to be had



