---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "315. Marx to Jenny Marx. 9 May "
Page_Range: "560-561"
---

# 315. Marx to Jenny Marx. 9 May 



**[p. 6]**

If you have nobody, Borch. asks that you telegraph him first thing tomorrow (it costs a shilling), so that he and Gurapert can continue to look round up here.

I have just telegraphed you to this effect, but the present letter is necessary to an understanding of the telegram.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913

315

MARX TO JENNY MARX239

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 9 May 1864 Dear Jenny,

POOR Lupus died today, at 10 minutes past 5 in the afternoon. I have just left his death-bed.

I went to see him on the evening of the day I arrived from London," but he was unconscious. The next morning he recog- nised me. I saw him in company with Engels and the two doctorsb

and, when we were leaving, he called after us (in a weak voice): 'You will come back, won't you?' It was a moment of lucidity. Soon afterwards he relapsed into a state of apathy. Up till Thursday— or really Friday' — evening, things hung in the balance so that there was some doubt about the outcome. But he was unconscious from Friday evening until the moment of his passing away. So long did it take for him to die, though he was not in pain. He was unquestionably the victim of that bombastic bungler/ I shall write at greater length tomorrow.

In him we have lost one of our few friends and fellow fighters. He was a man in the best sense of the word. His funeral will be on Friday.'

Your

[^1]: Karl First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in Annali, an. I, Milan, 1958

[^2]: 1 3 May - h Louis Borchardt and Eduard Gumpert - ' 5 and May - 1 Borchardt - •' 13 May

[^3]: 21—558



