---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "320. Marx to Engels. 26 May "
Page_Range: "566-568"
---

# 320. Marx to Engels. 26 May 



**[p. 529]**

reimbursements made by me in £s will be credited at the same rate. Think it over and let me know what you think about it.

As regards the transfer of the £10,000 to my account, you have no need to advise G. E. further; the contract, to which you are all subject, is sufficient.

Very many thanks for the pictures. They've touched up your face a bit more than is necessary; apart from that, they're very good. But you must now see to it that the other ones for my album follow on soon, and also remind the good Boellings about it, for so far I have none of them at all. In the case of the Blanks, I don't have one of Maria Senior, Emil Junior, Rudolf, and the younger ones.

Apropos. Should Ermen &: Engels over there be asked to pay the costs of an insertion, to which I was a co-signatory, in the deaths' column of the Kölner," Breslauerb and Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, I would ask you to attend to it and debit me accordingly.600

Give my love to Mother, if she is still in Barmen, and tell her that I've been keeping very well. Much love to Emma' (she's still not as plump as she used to be, but I trust that will resolve itself) and the little ones as well as to Rudolf and family, the Blanks, and the Boellings.

Your

Friedrich

320

[London,] Thursday, 26 May 1864 Dear Frederick,

It came as a very 'pleasant' surprise this morning (I had not been able to sleep the preceding night) to find my chest again adorned with two 'charming' FURUNCLES. Will you consult Gumpert

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , ,. , ,. Moscow 1934 Published m English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS249

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: " Kölnische Zeitung - b Breslauer Zeitung - c Emma Engels - d Rudolf Engels





**[p. 530]**

as to what I should do? I don't want to take iron since I already have a tendency to cerebral congestion. Nor do I wish to go to Allen, there being nothing I dread so much as having to recommence a regular course of treatment, thus disrupting my present work, and I simply must get the thing done at long last.547

Despite all that people said about how well I looked, I have all the while felt there was SOMETHING WRONG and the tremendous resolution I have to summon u p before I can tackle more difficult subjects also contributes to this sense of inadequacy. You EXCUSE THIS SPINOZISTIC TERM. Have OUR POOR Lupus's books been sent off to London? h01 I am worried about their non-arrival because—or so I understood—your WAREHOUSEMEN were supposed to have sent them off on Thursday (last).

WHAT DO YOU SAY OF GRANTS OPERATIONS?™2 All that The Times chooses to admire, OF COURSE, is Lee's strategy disguised as RETREATS.3 Says Tussy this morning, ' I T CONSIDERS THIS VERY CANNY, I DARESAY.' There's nothing I would be happier to see than success for Butler. It would be of inestimable value, were he to enter Richmond first. It would be bad if Grant had to retreat, BUT I THINK THAT FELLOW KNOWS WHAT HE IS ABOUT. It is to him, at any rate, that credit is due for the first Kentucky campaign, Vicksburg and the drubbing Bragg received in Tennessee.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Enclosed a note from Jones, in view of which you will, no doubt, be able to invite him FOR ANOTHER DAY.60'

[^2]: T h e WHOLE FAMILY send you their regards.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 19)3 Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: 77«" Times, 25 and 26 May 1864, leading articles.



