---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "323. Engels to Marx. 3 June "
Page_Range: "572-573"
---

# 323. Engels to Marx. 3 June 



**[p. 535]**

publication by a local society of a very sumptuous Record of the Revolution* in which all the EVENTS, documents, etc., of the present Civil War are REGISTERED from the time it first started. WELL, this RECORD has been sent gratis to some 20 or 30 people (including various European libraries), among them the QUEEN OF ENGLAND,1" J. Stuart Mill, Cobden, Bright, and—Freiligrath. He informed me of this, with the phrase that the Yankees had 'afforded him great pleasure and done him a great honour', and gave me the accompanying letter to read along with the printed list of the fortunate few. I should dearly like to know what the good fellow has done, might do, or intends to do for the Yankees. But loi générale': Freiligrath is to receive the honneurs on behalf of the German nation because the worthy citizen adopts so worthy and neutral an attitude, 'and, come to that, hasn't really learnt anything'.611

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, , ,. ,,),„ Published in English tor the lirst time

323

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 3 June 1864

Dear Moor,

I beg to confirm my lastd and today would humbly inform you that Lupus's will passed through the COURT OF PROBATE612 the day before yesterday and that I have taken possession of the document in question. I have also shown it to the bank and had it registered there, and on Monday or Tuesdaye shall draw the money from the bank (I can do this on my own without Borchardt) and remit it to you. There is about £230. I shall try and see B. tomorrow or on Monday and shall then do all I can to get the matter speedily wound up. The approximate amount of estate duty—£12f—will

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: " The Rebellion Record: a Diary of American Events - b Victoria - c general law

[^3]: d See this volume, p. 531. - e 6 or 7 June - f In the original: '£120', apparently a slip of the pen



