---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "326. Marx to Engels. 16 June "
Page_Range: "577-579"
---

# 326. Marx to Engels. 16 June 



**[p. 540]**

his troops (to the south side of the river). But I am hoping that Grant will, nevertheless, go through with the affair; at all events, there can be no doubt that, after the first battle in the Wilderness, Lee has shown little further inclination to engage in decisive encounters in the open field,618 on the contrary, he has always kept his main force in fortified positions and only committed himself to brief attacks. I also like the methodical pace of Grant's operations. On such terrain and with such an opponent it's the only correct method.

A collection for the Solingen chaps3 won't produce anything up here; however, it goes without saying that I shall send you something for them. Let me know, when you've reached that stage, how much they have got for the journey and how much it will cost.

Three days ago our old Hill finally handed in his cash box, but is, understandably enough, still quite incapable of tearing himself away from the office. He still haunts it every day, just as he has always done. It was not until today that he stayed away, at least for the morning, but after his dinner couldn't stand it any longer.

Many regards.

Your

F. E.

326

[London,] 16 June 1864 DEAR Frederick,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913, and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS67

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: THANKS FOR Dagbladet. Before I start on this letter—and so that I don't forget—here's a question for you: Are the following word groups I found in a Belgian etymologist's work b OK ANY VALUE?

[^5]: a Moll and Melchior (see this volume, pp. 533-34). - b H.J. Chavée, Essai d'étymologie philosophique ou Recherches sur l'origine et les variations des mots qui expriment les actes intellectuels et moraux.





**[p. 541]**

Sanskrit Wer (couvrir, protéger, respecter, honorer, aimer, chérir3), adjective Wertas (EXCELLENT, RESPECTABLE), Gothic Wairths, ANGLO-SAXON Weorth, English worth, Lithuanian werthas, Aleman- nic Werth.

Sanskrit Wertis, Latin virtus, Gothic Wairthi, Teutonic Werth. Sanskrit Wal (couvrir, fortifierb), valor, value. (???) Strohn is here. Arrived yesterday. Leaves for Bradford again tomorrow. Seems to me very much better. Also more PLUCKY now.

I and various other people here have collected so much for the two Solingen chaps' that only 2 more pounds are needed to enable them to leave for New York by sailing-vessel and not be completely broke on arrival there. I am also giving them a note for Dr Jacobi, by which means we shall discover what the modest little man is ABOUT.

Herewith a letter I have received from Liebknecht who also sent a piece from the Grenzboten about Lupus.d Liebknecht will by now have got my second letter containing a 'real consideration' (as Mr Patkul calls it in his secret despatchese).

The Russians would seem to be claiming Schleswig-Holstein for themselves under the heading of Oldenburg,619 and to be 'compensating' Prussia for it. This TRANSACTION WOULD BE TOO

A Dutch orientalist, Professor Dozy of Leyden, has brought out a book' to prove that 'Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are figments; that the Israelites were idolaters; that they carried round a "stone" in the " arke des Verbunds"g; that the tribe of Simeon (driven out under Saul) went to Mecca where they built a heathen temple and worshipped stones; that, after the release from Babylon, Ezra invented the myth of the creation up to and including Joshua, and also wrote laws and dogmas, thus paving the way for reform, monotheism, etc.'.

That's what they write and tell me from Holland; they also say that the book has created a great sensation among theologians there, particularly since Dozy is the most learned orientalist in Holland and, what's more—a professor at Leyden! Outside Germany at any rate (Renan, Colenso, Dozy, etc.) there is a remarkable anti-religious movement.

[^1]: CLEVER.

[^2]: a cover, protect, respect, honour, love, cherish - b cover, fortify - •' Moll and Melchior (see this volume, pp. 533-34, 540). - cl 'Eine Erinnerung an den Communis- ten Wolff, Die Grenzboten, 1864, I. Semester, 2. Band, pp. 398-400. - e J. R. von Patkul, Berichte an das Zaarische Cabinet in Moscou - f R. Dozy, De Israëlieten te Mekka. - s Ark of the Covenant

[^3]: 22*



