---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "329. Marx to Engels. 4 July "
Page_Range: "582-584"
---

# 329. Marx to Engels. 4 July 



**[p. 328]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 July 1864

DEAR Frederick,

Did you get the letter I sent you ABOUT 2 WEEKS ago, with the enclosure from Liebknecht, etc.? a

No answer yet from Eisner.621

I've been taking medicine again for ABOUT 10 days, and today have got a species of INFLUENZA as well. Hence NOT ABLE TO-DAY FOR

BETTER WRITING.

THANKS FOR Dagbladet. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 10,13 Published in English for the first time

329

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 4 July 1864

O n 3 June you wrote and told me that you would be SETTLING the business of the money with Borchardt the following day.b I have 3 reasons for wishing the thing to be settled:

1. Because of Borchardt; 2. I do not know by what r u m o u r (perhaps deriving from Germany, Trier) I have come to be known as a 'legatee'. It's

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR Frederick,

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 540-42.- b See this volume, p. 535.





**[p. 546]**

fantastic what bills I've been sent, dating back to ANCIENT TIMES {Neue Rheinische Zeitung included). 3. Had I had the money during the past 10 days, I'd have made a great deal of money on the Stock Exchange here. T h e time has come again when, with WIT and VERY LITHE MONEY, it's possible to make money in London.

For these reasons I'd like the business to be settled, after deduction, OF COURSE, from my share of the sums required for duties and other outgoings—to the LAWYER, etc.

Y o u WILL MUCH OBLIGE ME BY SETTLING THESE THINGS BEFORE Ju LY 1 5 . Y O U ITl USt excuse me for bothering you in view of your CHARGE OF BUSINESS, BUT

THERE ARE VERY SERIOUS INTERESTS AT STAKE.

Many thanks for settling the Freiligrath affair.3 Is the portrait he sent you the sinister Faustian one little Jenny has got in her album?

My wife, who attended an auction to buy the things she still required, has purchased a sturdy CARVING KNIFE AND FORK for you and will send them off today. I had told h e r there were none in your household.

Greetings from the EMPEROR OF CHINA b et cie.

Your

K. M.

My nose, mouth, etc., still bunged u p with influenza so that I can neither smell nor taste.

During this time, being utterly incapable of work, have read Carpenter, Physiology, Lord, ditto, Kölliker, Gewebelehre, Spurz- heim, The Anatomy of the Brain and the Nervous System, and Schwann and Schleiden, on the cells business.c In Lord's Popular Physiology, there's a good critique of phrenology, although the chap's religious. One passage recalls Hegel's Phenomenology; it reads:

As you know, 1. I'm always late off the mark with everything, and 2. I invariably follow in your footsteps. So it's probable that I

[^1]: *'They attempt to break up the mind into a number of supposed original faculties, such as no metaphysician will, for a moment, admit; and the brain into an equal number of organs, which the anatomist in vain asks to be shown, and then proceed to attach one of the former unadmitted suppositions as a mode of action to one of the latter undemonstrated existences.'*

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 548.- h Marx's daughter Jenny - c Th. Schwann, Microscopical Researches into the Accordance in the Structure and Growth of Animals and Plants; M. J. Schleiden, Contribution to Phylogenesis.



