---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "331. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 12 July "
Page_Range: "585-586"
---

# 331. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 12 July 

a day or two. Today I can't do anything. I've been slaving away at the office all day, arguing with lawyers and G. Ermen (the DEED OF PARTNERSHIP isn't ready yet, and until then G. E. refuses to recognise my right to act as a partner270), on top of which I've had Dronke here. Now it's nearly 7 o'clock, and I've still had no DINNER, nor have I yet finished work. So you see how things are. Many regards.

Your

F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English lor the first time

331

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

[London,] 12 July 1864 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park Dear Freiligrath,

I got a letter today (just now) on which the address would appear to be written in your hand. If that is so, I should like to know how the letter reached you? It is from that blackguard Brass (in Berlin) who has the impudence to ask me to forward a scrawl to Biscamp.622 Having lost sight of that vagabond Biscamp years ago, I have, moreover, no idea how to rid myself of the scrawl, since the creature's WHEREABOUTS are not known to me.

I am writing from my bed, having had to take to it for several days because of what was a very dangerous carbuncle. This damned complaint keeps incessantly cropping up again.

On the 15th inst. I shall send Lenchen to you bearing £30, returned with many thanks—if, that is, I am not myself capable, though I think I shall be, of betaking myself between now and the

15th (inclusive) to the City, where I have other business to attend to.

Salut.

Your

[^1]: K. M. First published in the notes in F. Mehr- ing, The Freiligrath-Marx Correspondence, Moscow-Leningrad, 1929 (in Russian)

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



