---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "332. Marx to Engels. 25 July "
Page_Range: "586-587"
---

# 332. Marx to Engels. 25 July 



**[p. 332]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

Ramsgate, 25 July 1864 46 Hardres Street

Dear Frederick,

You will see from the address that I am spending a few days in Ramsgate.

It was a far from agreeable surprise to discover that my FURUNCLE was in fact an extremely malignant CARBUNCLE and, what is more, has had the impudence to erupt just above my penis. So, for ABOUT 10 days, I've been obliged to spend most of my time in bed—and in this heat, too! The thing is clearing up pretty quickly here; however, my confidence has completely evaporated now that the disease has unexpectedly cropped up again in such a malignant form.

Jenny and Tussy are here with me; Laura is coming the day after tomorrow and in ABOUT 8 or 10 days we shall go to Holland, during which time my wife will betake herself to the seaside.

Apropos. Don't forget to send the latter her chain, as she will need this for her watch when at the resort. She says all you have to do is put it in a little box and have it posted, so sending it off couldn't possibly put you to much trouble.

As for the Schleswig-Holstein affair, I'm not yet wholly convinced that it won't end in a personal union between the Duchies and Denmark. The jealousy between Prussia and Austria and that felt by both towards the German Confederation, as well as the quarrel between Augustenburgb and Russia's pretender, Oldenburg,' etc., mean that such a solution is still at least a possibility, even at this late hour. Incidentally, as far back as 1851, Palmerston put forward the Duke of Oldenburgd en passant and as a pis aller" as candidate for Schleswig-Holstein.

I shall write and tell Laura to send you The Free Press. Your philistine on the spree lords it here as do, to an even

[^1]: I hope you have now sorted things out with Ermen and are no longer being BOTHERED by LAWYERS.3

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 548. - b Friedrich of Augustenburg - ' Peter Nikolaus Friedrich, Grand Duke of Oldenburg - d August Paul Friedrich - e last resort



