---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "333. Marx to Lion Philips. 17 August "
Page_Range: "587-589"
---

# 333. Marx to Lion Philips. 17 August 



**[p. 550]**

greater extent, his better half and his female OFFSPRING. It is almost sad to see venerable Oceanus, that age-old Titan, having to suffer these pigmies to disport themselves on his phiz, and serve them for entertainment.

BEST COMPLIMENTS from Jenny and Tussy. Life at the seaside suits both of them admirably. Addio.

Moor First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, (QJ3 Published in English for the first time

333

MARX TO LION PHILIPS239

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

London, 17 August 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Uncle,

I found your letter waiting for me here when I came back from the British Museum yesterday evening. It was already too late for me to reply straight away. I need not tell you how alarmed I and all the family were by the contents of your letter.623 One thing we failed to understand. Why didn't you leave the house instantly with Nettchena? I would advise you to do so even now. When the same thing happened in my family, I immediately sent the children away; and the giantessb can be nursed perfectly well without you. Why court danger unnecessarily? You will forgive me for interfering, but I feel too worried about you TO MINCE MATTERS. In fact, I am sorry that I am not with you in person, for this disease has no effect upon me, as I know from experience and, had you really insisted on not leaving the house (BUT WHY NOT?), I could have stood by you at this time of crisis, for in such crises two are better able than one, and three better able than two, TO KILL TIME AND ROUGH

I have written to Nettchen about our own recent doings,42 and she will pass on to you what little is worth mentioning. On the

[^1]: IT.

[^2]: 11 Antoinette Philips - h a servant in the Philips household





**[p. 1956]**

whole, things are going quite well here and all members of the family are reasonably fit.

Just now there's a political and social lull here. Everyone who can, makes off, either abroad or to seaside resorts in this country. T h e monotony is broken only by daily reports of terrible RAILWAY ACCIDENTS. Capital over here isn't as much subject to police supervision as on the Continent, and hence it's of no concern whatever to the RAILWAY DIRECTORS HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE KILLED DURING AN EXCURSION SEASON, IF ONLY THE BALANCE LOOKS TO THE COMFORTABLE SIDE. All attempts to make these RAILWAY kings responsible for their HOMICIDAL NEGLECT OF ALL PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES have hitherto come to grief as a result of the great influence exerted by the RAILWAY INTEREST in the HOUSE OF COMMONS.

Another source of distraction over here is the ANXIETY PREVAILING IN MERCANTILE CIRCLES BECAUSE OF THE RISE OF THE RATE OF DISCOUNT! I t is C e r t a i n that, if the present RATE OF DISCOUNT remains at its present high for a few more weeks, there will be a great CRASH among the myriads of SWINDLING JOINT STOCK COMPANIES, which have been springing u p like mushrooms this year. Already, here and there in the CITY a major bankruptcy heralds the approaching storm.

I recently had an opportunity of looking at a very important scientific work, Grove's Correlation of Physical Forces. H e demon- strates that mechanical motive force, heat, light, electricity, magnetism and CHEMICAL AFFINITY are all in effect simply modifica- tions of the same force, and mutually generate, replace, merge into each other, etc. With great skill he dismisses such odious metaphysical-physical phantasms as 'latent heat' (as good as 'invisible light'), electric 'fluid' and similar verbal pis aller* which come in handy as understudies in place of ideas.

I hope to have good tidings of you soon. So much am I taken u p with thoughts of you that I a m unable to compose myself sufficiently to read the important AMERICAN NEWS today.

Your affectionate nephew

K. M.

[^1]: T h e whole family send their warmest regards. Kindly remember me to Jettchen, the doctor, Fritz b et cie.

[^2]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in International Review of Social History, Vol. I, Part 1, Assen,

[^3]: 11 last resort - h Henriette Sophia van Anrooij, Antonie Johannes Wouters van Anrooij, Friedrich Philips



