---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "334. Marx to Engels. 31 August "
Page_Range: "589-590"
---

# 334. Marx to Engels. 31 August 



**[p. 334]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 31 August 1864

DEAR Frederick,

I returned from Ramsgate3 exactly three weeks ago today. The trip to Holland has fallen through, because a maid in my uncle's15

household suddenly contracted smallpox.

Last week my wife had a severe attack of cholerine which did, for a spell, look like becoming dangerous. Yesterday she left for Brighton (solo).

I have sundry letters from Liebknecht here which, however, I shall not send as I don't know whether you are in Manchester. The enclosed scrawl by Colletc will amuse you, and, should you not be there, it doesn't really matter. What naïveté on C.'s part! Since (to use an Austrian construction) I had done a long article on the RUSSIAN CLAIMS for him, which he didn't print, he expects me to take an interest in his ridiculous rubbish.

I've been operative again for a couple of days. Before that I was still troubled with sickness and INCAPABLE. If you haven't left yet, let us know at once. We hope to see you on your way through at any rate. The children send you their love. Jenny can hardly wait to show you her GREENHOUSE.

I haven't yet quite made up my mind about the Schleswig- Holstein affair, and more facts will be needed before a clear picture can be gained of it. You were right when you predicted the rebirth of the Holy Alliance.e Bonaparte would seem to have a strong 'inclination AT LEAST' to make 'a fourth in the alliance'.1 Since the outbreak of the Polish revolution to date, the utter despicability of the fellow has Manifested itself in the clearest and most genuine light.624

[^1]: The enclosed letter from Eisner is in reply to my wife's asking him for biographical notes on Lupus.d

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 549. - b Lion Philips - c Marx apparently means the item [C. D. Collet,] 'Groundlessness of Any Claim of Russia to Holstein-Gottorp' in The Free Press, Vol. XII, No. 5, 4 May 1864. - d See this volume, pp. 588-89.- e See this volume, pp. 505-06.- f Paraphrase of a passage from Schiller's ballad Die Bürgschaft.



