---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "335. Engels to Marx. 2 September "
Page_Range: "590-592"
---

# 335. Engels to Marx. 2 September 



**[p. 553]**

I've had an opportunity of looking at Grove's Correlation of Physical Fqrces. He is beyond doubt the most philosophical of the English (and indeed German!) natural scientists. Our friend Schleiden has an inborn- proclivity for fadaise,3 although he, by mistake, discovered the cell.

Herewith) Pieper's card.625 It accidentally fell into Liebknecht's hands and he has returned it to me.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Be so good as to send me Ernest Jones's Manchester address.

DON'T FORGET!

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, i g j ^ Published in English for the first time

335

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 2 September 1864

Dear Moor,

I had assumed from your last letterb that you'd be in the depths of the Dutch fens, hence my pertinacious silence. I couldn't find your address in Holland. I sent your wife the watch and chain on 6 August, in a box, by registered mail, and trust it arrived safely.

I intend to travel from Hull to Hamburg next Thursday, the 8th, or Saturday, the 10th September, in order to take a look at OUR NEW PROPERTY in Schleswig and Holstein and shall, provided there are no passport difficulties, also go from Lübeck to Copenhagen. I shall not be returning before the end of September and, if at all feasible, shall spend a day in London on the way back.

The PARTNERSHIP business has at last been settled, and the contracts signed,1 so I hope to have 5 years' peace from that direction.

We have left our house in Tennant Street626 and have been living for the past fortnight about 500 paces further along, in a

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a inanity - ]i See this volume, p. 549.- c ibid., p. 548.





**[p. 554]**

somewhat larger house with 2 living-rooms downstairs; thus we have bettered ourselves after much the same fashion as you did by your last removal. The address is 86 Mornington Street, Stockport Road, Manchester. Letters to be addressed to me by name as before.

Jones's address is 52 Cross Street, Manchester. The Danes still believe, or rather fear, that a personal union will be established and, since editors Bille, of the Dagbladet, and Ploug, of the Faedrelandet, are both deputies and undoubtedly have good sources, and, since the present ministers are also good Russians, I feel convinced that powerful intrigues towards that end are being conducted by Russia. However, Monsieur Bismarck certainly has other things in view and, if he is to gain positive advantages, i.e. if he is to mediatise Schleswig-Holstein,027 I think he will need the Augustenburg chap3 pretty badly. This much is certain, never has Prussian dynastic policy involving the partition of Germany along the Main been so insolently advocated, and as for the rotten liberal gang, they seem to be taking quite kindly to it. Should this be the case—and I shall find out easily enough in Germany—the Prussian bourgeoisie will be giving us a tremendous lever for the next SET-TO. I am sure by the way that Eisner is right, at least about the old provinces628 being intolerably flushed with victory. Indeed, I shall take care not to go there. It will be bad enough even on the Rhine.

To the worthy Gottfried's1' intense alarm, I told him about Monsieur Bonaparte's ardent desire to join the Holy Alliance0 on the very day the matter became known. The fellow's bound to come to a bad end. To ruminate perpetually about 'business' is very aging, as I can see from Gottfried, who has much the same attitude to trade as B. has to politics, and whose train of thought is also similar. As the years go by, one dreams of retirement and, if it's not feasible, one's health suffers. N'est pas Palmerston qui veut.6'29

Ce cher1' Bonaparte is, I should say, very much ON THE DECLINE. SO much the better; once he starts to flag, he'll soon be done for.

Best wishes to the girls. But why didn't you drop me a couple of lines to say you were not going to Holland and that your wife was ill? Your

[^1]: F. E. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, jgj3 ' Published in English for the first time a Friedrich of Augustenburg - h Gottfried Ermen - r See this volume, p. 552. - d That dear



