---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "336. Marx to Engels. 2 September "
Page_Range: "592-593"
---

# 336. Marx to Engels. 2 September 



**[p. 336]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 September 1864

Dear Frederick,

Yesterday afternoon I received a letter from Freiligrath, of which copy below; from it you will see that Lassalle has been gravely wounded in a duel in Geneva. I went to see Freiligr. that same evening. However, he had not received any more telegrams. Incidentally, he told me—entre nous"—that his bank was in a state of crisis, aggravated by the affair in Geneva and the role Fazy had played in the same.630

Salut.

Your

K. M.b

[^1]: Dear Marx,

[^2]: 'I have just had a letter from Klapka in Geneva, containing the sad news that, on 30 August, Lassalle fought a duel in Geneva with a Wallachian pseudo-princec and was mortally wounded. Herewith the details from K.'s letter

[^3]: '"Lassalle had been conducting a love-affair here, though with perfectly honourable intentions as he wished to marry the girl,d the daughter of the Bavarian envoy, von Dönniges. The father objected to the marriage, the girl deceived poor Lassalle; a man to whom she had been previously engaged, the above-mentioned pseudo-prince, arrived from Berlin; then came explanations, an unpleasant exchange of letters, and a challenge ensued. Lassalle's seconds were Colonel Riistow and my fellow countryman, General Count Bethlen. Lassalle, as befitted a man of his reputation and political position, behaved with no less courage than dignity. He was shot in the stomach and is now laid up at the Hôtel Victoria with his life hanging in the balance. Unfortunately for him, the bullet is lodged deep in the body, so the wound might well become gangrenous. I went to see him at once upon my arrival and iounc. him dictating his will, but otherwise calm and resigned to death. I am exceeding"; sorry for him; often one does not get to know a person until his end is neai ,u tern.;.

[^4]: a between ourselves - b There follows the text of Frc IJ„ handwriting in the original (see also p. 557). - c J. von 1", < Dönniges



