---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "1. Jenny Marx to Marx. 16 March 1860 "
Page_Range: "604-605"
---

# 1. Jenny Marx to Marx. 16 March 1860 



**[p. 567]**

1

JENNY MARX TO MARX

IN MANCHESTER <*2

[London,] 16 March I860"

My Dear Karl,

A thousand thanks for the letter42 and the SPECIE. I have not got Rheinländer's address, since you took your address book away with you. But, so as to lose no time, I have, none the less, written to him and directed the letter to Mark Lane, care of Gänsewinkel. I could not think of anybody who might be able to tell me his address, which is not indicated in his letters. If you think the letter might fail to reach him by this means, you had better write to him yourself. I shall at once betake my HUMBLE BEING to Baccalaureus and make my report. We have indeed learned of late to distinguish true and loyal friends from shams. What a difference between the lesser folk and the GRANDEES. Lassalle, by the by, has grown fearfully stupid and narrow-minded; even that modicum of lawyer's acumen he had has gone to the devil, and Heraclitus has made him hellishly DULL and dark.b None of his raisonnements' is valid, each overturning the last. Nothing could have given me greater pleasure than the news about your book. Russia has always been good ground for you.643 In the long run, everything is going better than I had sometimes dared to hope in my hours of solitude. One becomes so beset by doubts and fears and in the end one despairs of everything, particularly when one thinks of the universal duplicity, baseness and cowardice—the Germans' be- haviour with regard to the Humboldt CASE644 alone is enough to

[^1]: a The letter, dated by Jenny Marx ' '50', bears a note in Engels' handwriting saying 'Should read"60' ('Soll sein 60'). - b An allusion to Lassalle's book Die Philosophie

[^2]: Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos. - c arguments



