---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "2. Jenny Marx to Engels. 14 August 1860 "
Page_Range: "605-606"
---

# 2. Jenny Marx to Engels. 14 August 1860 

Jenny

First published abridged (in Russian) in Printed according to the original Voprosy istorii KPSS, No. 5, Moscow, 1978 and in full (likewise in Russian) in The Published in English for the first Correspondence of Karl Marx, Frederick time Engels and Members of the Marx Family,

1835-1871, Moscow, 1983

2

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 14 August 1860] Dear Mr Engels,

Moor has asked me to say that, if you possibly can, you should concoct an article3 for him by Fridayb or Saturday. Several have, alas, already fallen by the way, and even today's still seems to me problematical.0 ANYTHING WILL DO. Maybe some chat about the attack on Venice—no matter what.

This week I hope to start copying the pamphlet/ The thing is taking ages, and I'm afraid Karl is making too thorough a job of it.

My pet bugbear is the 'analysis of Techow's letter'56 and that, I should say, is where the snag lies. Everything else is making better headway.

Every day Schily and Becker send us piles of fresh documents, which are being incorporated into the thing. And I'm sorry to say that nothing has been done about finding a publisher yet. But the whole business is to be completed this week. 'And he who disbelieves it is mistaken.'6

Warm regards from the girls and myself.

Yours,

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol.-XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 179. - b 17 August - c This refers to Marx's article 'The New Sardinian Loan.—The Impending French and Indian Loans'. - d Karl Marx, Herr Vogt, - e Wolfram von Eschenbach, Parzifal, IX.



