---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "6. Jenny Marx to Engels. Between 21 and 24 March 1861 "
Page_Range: "614-615"
---

# 6. Jenny Marx to Engels. Between 21 and 24 March 1861 

Poor Lupus, how sorry I am for him, lying there helpless and in great pain, deprived of solicitous nursing and wholly à la merci of a rapacious LANDLADY, though in fact his afflictions are largely his own fault. What's the point of such awful pedantry, such conscientiousness? You ought to take the old gentleman more in hand and, above all, wean him from GIN and BRANDY, those arch-enemies of gout. Excuse this hasty note; there is so much to do and think about and today I have still to fit in a trip to town where a pawn ticket is due—BUT NEVER MIND, SO long as we pull Lenchen through, and my beloved Karl soon sends good tidings.

Warm regards from the girls and from your

Jenny Marx

6

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

[London, between 21 and 24 March 1861]

My dear Mr Engels,

Hitherto I have sent you so many epistles of complaint that I now feel impelled to bring you BETTER NEWS for once. First, so far as it is humanly possible to say, Lenchen will recover. The doctor is very satisfied with her condition and extremely optimistic. The rambling, singing, weeping and raving that so alarmed us has subsided to a great extent, and a MUTTON CHOP has just been taken

[^1]: First published in: Marx/Engels, Werke, Printed according to the original Bd. 30, Berlin, 1964 , Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER



