---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "7. Jenny Marx to Engels. Beginning of April 1861 "
Page_Range: "615-618"
---

# 7. Jenny Marx to Engels. Beginning of April 1861 

Yours,

Jenny Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 30, Moscow 1963 Published in English for the first time

7

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

[London, beginning of April 1861]

Dear Mr Engels,

I find it incomprehensible that Moor shouldn't have written to you yet. I had thought you were quite au courant withe the Marx FAMILY AFFAIRS, and even hoped I might learn further details from you, since this time my dear lord and master's letters to me are quite exceptionally prone to the 'lapidary style'. So far, I have had to content myself with the most sketchy outlines and the driest of FACTS; however, I do know a little more than you, and hence will hasten to pass on that modicum, the more so since it is, in the

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a 17 March - b Sophie von Hatzfeldt - • 'Worth' in the original; the nickname 'daughter of Babylon' was used by Weerth in his letters. - d Ludmilla Assing - c knew all about



main, most satisfactory. To begin at the beginning. The unclea has fallen in with all the son's648 proposals and, as soon as Karl arrives in Bommel, will settle the financial business. Now, as to the rumours in the papers, they are all wrong, as you no doubt supposed, nor has it ever remotely occurred to Karl that the family might move to and settle down in Berlin. What he did propose to effect there, however, was his renaturalisation.M2 I don't quite understand this and don't know why Karl should be in such a hurry to become a Royal Prussian 'subject' again. I'd rather have remained a 'stray groschen'b (red Wolffs' late-lamented threepen- ny bit) a while longer. Negotiations over this have prolonged his stay in Berlin. The government wanted to settle the matter by according him Berlin citizenship with which Karl refused to be satisfied, and thus the whole business has dragged on from day to day. Today Karl writes to say that he doesn't expect to hear for certain before the 12th and until then must continue to be bored stiff. Little Izzy still seems addicted to drivelling and the speculative notion. In other respects, he really gave proof of the utmost friendship for Karl, whose inseparable companion he has been. Now, Moor would have proceeded straight from Berlin to Bommel, had he not received from his mother an invitation, which has left him undecided whether or not he should go to Trier. If he does go there, it means yet more delay before he comes home, and he could hardly be here before a fortnight is out.278 Lassalle's head seems to be filled with dreams of a great newspaper; he also maintains that he could contribute 20,000 talers to it. But what a risky venture for Karl—a daily paper, and on the countess's own ground, too!ri I myself feel small longing for the fatherland, for 'dear', beloved, trusty Germany, that mater dolorosa of poets—and as for the girls! The idea of leaving the country of their precious Shakespeare appals them; they've become English to the marrow and cling like limpets to the soil of England. It's a good thing your warrant has been withdrawn1'; thus you're free to go, after all. I assume that Schily and Imandt will be in the same category as yourself. Yesterday I had news of the former through Rheinlän- der. For months the poor fellow has been so ill and miserable that he finds it difficult even to write and it costs him a tremendous effort to drag himself from one place to another. His friends, it seems, had pretty well given him up and believed him to be

[^1]: 11 Lion Philips - h Berlin dialect in the original: 'Jroschen' instead of 'Groschen', and 'jeblieben' instead of 'geblieben'. - c Ferdinand Wolff - d Countess von Hatz- feldt intended to finance the newspaper (see this volume, pp. 252, 257, 261, 280-81, 291). - e See this volume, pp. 290, 291.



I was most interested to hear from you about the Lancashire STRIKES, since it's impossible to get a clear idea of what's going on from the newspapers.M9 At any rate, inopportune though this opposition on the part of the English workers may be, and unedifying as are its results, it is a heartening manifestation by comparison with the Prussian workers' movement and the social question in the shape it assumes over there—namely, Schulze- Delitzsch, cum the capital-loving Straubingers,650 their savings banks and distress funds!

As regards Lenchen's health, it is improving steadily, if only very slowly. She is still very, very weak, but is already spending hours out of bed, and today she even walked up and down outside the house in the sunshine.

I am glad to hear that poor Lupus is back on his feet again. Please give him my warmest regards; similarly the girls ask me to send you their most cordial regards with this gossipy scrawl.

Let us hear from you again soon. With warm regards,

[^1]: Yours, J e n ny Marx a Gottfried Kinkel; an allusion to Johanna Kinkel's book Hans Ibeles in London. -

[^2]: b Sibylle Hess - c See this volume, pp. 185, 71.- '' Montijo - '' Pius IX - f Mathilde Bonaparte



