---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "9. Jenny Marx to Berta Markheim. 12 October 1863 "
Page_Range: "620-621"
---

# 9. Jenny Marx to Berta Markheim. 12 October 1863 

Your

Jenny Marx

First published (in Italian) in Movimento Printed according to the original operaio, No. 2, March-April 1955

Published in English for the first time

9

JENNY MARX TO BERTA MARKHEIM

IN FULDA

Hampstead, 12 October 1863

My dear Mrs Markheim,

On writing the date, I now see to my great dismay that I have let more than a month go by without answering your last kind letter. I got it just after we returned home from Hastings r'4H and, for many petty and mundane reasons, failed to reply at once and, as you know, nothing is more dangerous in correspondence than procrastinating instead of responding to the first warm impulse of the heart and at once setting one's pen at a canter, lest the nib become encrusted with ink. I am not only pleading on my own behalf today, I must also put in a word for my lord and master, who in this respect has a much blacker list of sins with which to reproach his guilty conscience. He has, of course, received Dr Kugelmann's letter," and I really have no excuse to offer for his failure to write, other than to say that, in general, he is one of the worst correspondents the world has ever known and often keeps his oldest and best friends waiting for months, even years. If he now treats Dr K. in the same manner as he does his oldest and best friends, he (Dr K.) must be good enough to make allowances for such dilatoriness, and I trust that you, my dear Mrs Markheim, will put in a good word on his behalf. Should he not write very soon, it will, I imagine, be because he hopes to see him in person in the not too distant future; just as it is his intention to

[^1]: See this volume, p. 461.



