---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "10. Jenny Marx to Engels. Beginning of November 1863 "
Page_Range: "621-622"
---

# 10. Jenny Marx to Engels. Beginning of November 1863 

Our stay in Hastings, a delightful and beautifully situated spot, where we spent our time either beside, upon or in the sea, has done us all a great deal of good, particularly our ailing little Jenny, whose cheeks have again filled out and grown rosy.

Her cough has not quite gone, but it seldom recurs and then only in very mild form, and she has also got her appetite back. Touch wood, touch wood! And I only hope we shall spend a less wretched winter than the last one.

We are closely following the course of events in our fatherland but, with the best will in the world, I cannot share your opinion nor give myself up to sanguine hopes. Perhaps the prolonged anxiety and dismal experiences of the immediate past have clouded my mind and obscured my vision so that I see everything in darker colours and paint things grey on grey.1"1

I hope I shall soon hear from you again and, in sending you my family's warmest greetings, I bid you farewell for today.

Yours ever,

Jenny Marx

10

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

[London, beginning of November 1863] 9 Grafton Terrace

Dear Mr Engels,

Moor sends you herewith the 'MOST NOBLE Daoud Bey's" Free Press. It will amuse you a lot. Karl, alas, cannot write himself. For the past week he has been very unwell and is tied to the sofa.

[^1]: First published (in Italian) in Movimenlo Printed according to the original operaio, No. 2, March-April 1955

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: Esther Kosel - b See this volume, p. 499.- l David Urquhart



