---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "12. Jenny Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. About 24 November 1863 "
Page_Range: "623-625"
---

# 12. Jenny Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. About 24 November 1863 

Yours,

Jenny Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 30, Moscow 1963 Published in English for the lirst time

12

JENNY MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

[London, about 24 November 1863]

My dear Mr Liebknecht,

When I last wrote to your dear wife, I had little conception of the horrifying days lying immediately ahead of us. For 3 weeks my beloved Karl was desperately ill, for he was suffering from one of the most dangerous and painful illnesses—a CARBUNCLE on his back. I need add nothing to those few lines. You and your dear wife know how much you mean to us. Nor, even if I wanted to, could I tell you in detail all we went through during these weeks, so I will say no more and, at the behest of my beloved husband, now on the road to recovery, pass on to you the enclosed circular, issued by the Workers' Society.''52 Aside from the interest attaching to Polish affairs, it was, I believe, sent into the world to put a stop to the 'pro-police movement' on the part of certain persons. ' The 'Chair' at once swallowed the thing hook, line and sinker, and asked for 50 copies for distribution to the communities.d Karl is sending it to you to make you au fait with the matter.

All the same, now that I have executed my task, let me just tell you how our family afflictions began. Karl had already been ailing

[^1]: a A quotation from a speech made by Lassalle in Solingen on 27 September 1863 as reported in the Berliner Reform, No. 229, 1 October 1863.- b Sophie von Hatzfeldt - ' This refers to Lassalle (see end of previous letter). - d of the General Association of German Workers





**[p. 587]**

He sends you both his cordial regards, as do my poor daughters. Please write, both of you, as soon as you can and as much as you can. He greatly enjoys getting letters. Please excuse my writing so incoherently.

Your old friend,

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 30, Moscow, 1963

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a ale at 4d a quart



