---
Volume: 41
Document_Title: "14. Jenny Marx to Karl Friedrich Moritz Eisner. Middle of June 1864 "
Page_Range: "625-630"
---

# 14. Jenny Marx to Karl Friedrich Moritz Eisner. Middle of June 1864 



**[p. 13]**

LAURA MARX TO ENGELS654

IN MANCHESTER

London, 10 June 1864 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, N.W.

Dear Sir,

I have been commissioned by Dr Marx to acknowledge the receipt of the second half of the banknotes the first half of which arrived here Yesterday. Also to express his thanks for the photographs received this morning.11

As to the Biography which You intend writing, he says that as You have the necessary papers etc., You can commence it at once, while he writes to Dr Eisner for further materials.621

I think I have now said all I have been requested to say.

I am, dear Sir,

Obediently Yours,

L. M. Secretary

F. Engels Esq.

14

JENNY MARX TO KARL FRIEDRICH MORITZ ELSNER

[London, middle of June 1864] 1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Sir,

We assume you are the author of the fine obituary of our late, dear friend W. Wolff, which appeared in the Breslauer Zeitung.c

My husband is anxious to write a detailed biography of him, but

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981

[^2]: IN BRESLAU6

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 539. - b Polish name: Wroclaw. - < [K. F. M. Eisner,] 'Kasematten-Wolff, Breslauer Zeitung, Morgen-Ausgabe, 24 May 1864.



Yours,

Jenny Marx, née von Westphalen

First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time



NOTES

AND INDEXES



