---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "3. K. Marx. The London Press.-  Policy of Napoleon on the Turkish Question "
Page_Range: "49-53"
---

# 3. K. Marx. The London Press.-  Policy of Napoleon on the Turkish Question 



**[p. 18]**

Karl M a r x

THE LONDON PRESS.—POLICY OF NAPOLEON

ON THE TURKISH QUESTION20

London, March 25th, 1853

Until this morning no further authentic news has been received from Turkey. The Paris Correspondent of The Morning Herald, of to-day, asserts that he has been informed by responsible authority that the Russians have entered Bucharest. In the Courrier de

Marseille of the 20th inst. we read:

[^1]: "We are in a position to convey to the knowledge of our readers the substance of the note which has already been presented to the Sublime Porte by M. d'Ozeroff immediately after the departure of Count Leiningen, and before the brutal 'sortie' of the Prince Menchikoff in the midst of the Divan. The following are the principal points referred to in this diplomatic note. The Count de Nesselrode complained in the most lively terms that the Porte, in spite of its formal promise not to attack the Montenegrins, had carried on a sanguinary war against that people, which had given the greatest dissatisfaction to the Cabinet of St. Petersburg. In order, now, to secure a sufficient protection to the Montenegrins, and for their preservation from new disasters, Russia would invite the Porte to recognize the independence of Montenegro. The note contained also a protest against the blockade of the Albanian Coast, and in conclusion it pressed the demand upon the Sultan to dismiss those ministers whose doings had always occasioned misunderstandings between the two governments. On the receipt of this note Turkey is said to have shown a disposition to yield, although with regret, to that one point relating to the dismission of ministers, particularly of Fuad Effendi, the Sultan's brother-in-law, who has actually been replaced by Rifaat Pasha, a partisan of Russia. The Porte, however, refused to acknowledge the independence of Montenegro. It was then that Prince Menchikoff, without previously paying the usual compliments to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, presented himself in the Divan, to the neglect of all diplomatic forms, and intimated in a bullying manner to that body to subscribe to his demands. In consequence of this demand the Porte invoked the protection of England and France."

[^2]: a Abdul Mejid.— Ed.





**[p. 19]**

The whole London Press, Morning Press and Evening Press, Daily Press and Weekly Press rose as one man against the "leading journal." The Morning Post mocks at the intelligence of its brethren of The Times, whom it accuses of spreading deliberately false and absurd news. The Morning Herald calls it "our Hebraeo-Austro- Russian contemporary," The Daily News more shortly the "Brun-

[^1]: a Nicholas I.— Ed. b See the leader in The Times,No. 21383, March 23, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 20]**

"The journalists who have proposed to surrender the Turkish Empire to Russia, on the score of the commercial eminence of a dozen large [Anglo-]Greek firms, are quite right in claiming for themselves the monopoly of brilliancy!"

The Morning Advertiser says:

"The Times is right in stating that it is isolated in its advocacy of Russian interests It is printed in the English language. But that is the only thing English about it. It is, where Russia is concerned, Russian all over."c

There is no doubt that the Russian bear will not draw in his paws, unless he be assured of a momentary "entente cordiale" between England and France.22 Now mark the following wonder- ful coincidence. On the very day when The Times was trying to persuade my lords Aberdeen and Clarendon, that the Turkish affair was a mere squabble between France and Russia, the "roi des drôles" d as Guizot used to call him, M. Granier de Cassagnac, happened to discover in the Constitutionnel, that it was all nothing but a quarrel between Lord Palmerston and the Czar.e Truly, when we read these papers, we understand the Greek orators with Macedonian oxen on their tongues, at the times when Demos- thenes fulminated his Philippics.

As for the British aristocracy represented by the Coalition Ministry, they would, if need be, sacrifice the national English interests to their particular class interests, and permit the consolidation of a juvenile despotism in the East in the hopes of finding a support for their valetudinarian oligarchy in the West. As to Louis Napoleon he is hesitating. All his predilections are on the side of the Autocrat, whose system of governing he has introduced into France, and all his antipathies are against England, whose parliamentary system he has destroyed there. Besides, if he permits the Czar's plundering in the East, the Czar will perhaps permit him to plunder in the West. On the other hand he is as quite sure of the feelings of the Holy Alliance with regard to the "parvenu Khan." Accordingly he observes an

[^1]: a The Morning Post, No. 24726, March 22, 1853; The Morning Herald, No. 22115, March 25, 1853,and The Daily News,No. 2133, March 23, 1853.— Ed.

[^2]: b The Morning Chronicle,No. 26910, March 24, 1853.— Ed. The Morning Advertiser, March 24, 1853.— Ed. King of the buffoons.— Ed. A. Granier de Cassagnac, "Des Affaires d'Orient", Le Constitutionnel, No. 83, March 24, 1853.— Ed.



Written on March 25, 1853

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3739, April 11, 1853; re printed in the Semi-Weekly Tribune, No 822, April 12, 1853

Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune

[^1]: Signed: Karl Marx



