---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "10. K. Marx. Achievements of the Ministry "
Page_Range: "81-88"
---

# 10. K. Marx. Achievements of the Ministry 



**[p. 50]**

Karl Marx

ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE MINISTRY

London, Tuesday, April 12, 1853

The best thing perhaps that can be said in favor of the Coalition Ministry is that it represents impotency in power at a moment of transition, when not the reality, but only the appearance of government, is possible, with evanescent old parties and not yet consolidated new ones.

The "administration of all the talents," what has it accomplished during its first quarter's trial? Two readings of the Jewish Disabilities Bill and three of the Canada Clergy Reserves Bill.49

The latter enables the Canadian Legislature to dispose of a certain portion of the proceeds of the land-sales hitherto reserved exclusively for the benefit of the favorite churches of England and Scotland. When first laid before the House by Lord John Russell, it consisted of three clauses, the third clause repealing the enactment by which the consolidated fund was charged to supply the deficiency, if in any year the Canada land-sales could not produce £9,285. This bill had been carried through a second reading, but on the House going into Committee50 upon it (March 18) Lord John suddenly moved the withdrawal of his own third clause. Now, if the Canadian Legislature were to secularize the Clergy Reserves, about £10,000 per annum would be taken out of the pockets of the British people for the maintenance of a sect thousands of miles away. The Radical Minister, Sir W. Molesworth who disclaims all ecclesiastical endowments, appeared himself to have become a convert to Lord John's doctrine "that British Colonies were not to be freed from the incubus of the Established Church, except at the cost and risk of the British people at home."

Three Radical resolutions were proposed during the first quarter's trial. Mr! Collier moved the abolition of the Ecclesiastical



**[p. 51]**

When Lord John Russell first3 announced the programme of the Coalition Ministry, and when it was received amid general consternation, his adherents exclaimed, "We must have something to be enthusiastic at. Public education shall be the thing. Our Russell is breeding a wonderful Education scheme. You will hear of it."

Now we have heard of it. It was on the 4th of April that Russell gave a general description of his intended Educational Reform. Its principal features consist in enabling the municipal councils to levy a local rate for the assistance of existing schools in which the Church of England doctrines are required to be taught. As to the Universities, those pet-children of the State Church, those chief opponents to every reform, Lord John hopes "that the Univer- sities will reform themselves."6 The malversation of the charities destined for educational establishments is notorious. Their value may be guessed from the following:

[^1]: a February 10, 1853.— Ed.

[^2]: Here and below John Russell's speech is quoted from The Times, No. 21394, April 5, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 52]**

It needs no great sagacity to conceive why the oligarchs living on the malversation of these funds are very cautious in dealing with them. Russell proposes:

"Charities are to be examined into, those under £30 per annum in the County Courts, those above by the Master of the Rolls. But no suit in either of those Courts is to be instigated without the permission of a Committee of the Council appointed for the purpose."

The permission of a committee is necessary to institute a suit in the Imperial Courts to redress the plunder of the charities originally destined for the education of the people. A permission! But Russell, even with this reservation, feels not quite sure. He adds:

"If the administration of a school is found to be corrupt, nobody but the Committee of Council shall be allowed to interfere."

This is a true Reform in the old English sense of the word. It neither creates anything new, nor abolishes anything old. It aims at conserving the old system, by giving it a more reasonable form and teaching it, so to say, new manners. This is the mystery of the "hereditary wisdom" of English oligarchical legislation. It simply consists in making abuses hereditary, by refreshing them, as it were, from time to time, by an infusion of new blood.

If everybody must confess that the Jewish Disabilities Bill was a little attempt at establishing religious tolerance, the Canada Reserves Bill a little attempt at granting Colonial Self-Government, the Education Bill a little attempt at avoiding public education, Gladstone's financial scheme is, undoubtedly, a mighty little attempt at dealing with that giant monster, the National Debt of Great Britain.

On the 8th of April, before the promulgation of the budget, Mr. Gladstone laid before the House of Commons a statement of several resolutions dealing with the public debt, and, before this statement had been made, The Morning Chronicle had made a special announcement that resolutions of the utmost importance were about to be proposed, "heralded by rumors of great interest and magnitude."3 The funds rose on this rumor. There was an

[^1]: The Morning Chronicle, No. 26922, April 7, 1853 (cf. this volume, pp. 48-49).— Ed.





**[p. 53]**

The ultimate aim of Mr. Gladstone's propositions, as stated by himself, was to reduce the interest on the public stocks to the standard rate of 2V2 per cent. Now, in the years 1822-23-24-25, 1830-31, 1844-45, reductions were made from 5 per cent. to472 per cent., from 472 to 4 per cent., from 4 to 3V2 per cent., from 3V2 to 3 per cent, respectively. Why should there not be a reduc- tion from 3 per cent, to 2V2 per cent.? Mr. Gladstone's proposals are as follows:

Firstly. With respect to various stocks amounting to £9,500,000, and chiefly connected with the old South Sea bubble,51 to bring them under one single denomination, and to reduce them compulsorily from 3 to 23A per cent. This would give a permanent annual saving approaching to £25,000. The invention of a new common name for various stocks, and the saving of £25,000 on an annual expense of £30,000,000, is certainly not to be boasted of.

Secondly. He proposes the issue of a new financial paper called Exchequer Bonds, not exceeding in amount £30,000,000, transfera- ble by simple delivery without costs of any kind, bearing interest at 23/4 per cent, up to Sept. 1, 1864, and then 2V2 per cent, up to Sept. 1, 1894. Now this is merely the creation of a new financial instrument limited in its use by the wants of the monied and mercantile classes. But how can he keep £18,000,000 of Exche- quer Bills at IV2 per cent, in circulation, with Exchequer Bonds at 2V2 per cent.? And is it not a loss to the country to pay 1 per cent, more upon Exchequer Bonds than upon Exchequer Bills? Be this as it may, this second proposition has at least nothing to do with the reduction of the public debt.

Thirdly and lastly. We come to the chief object, the only important point of Gladstone's resolutions, to the 3 per cent, consols and the 3 per cent, reduced, amounting together to a capital of nearly £500,000,000. Hie Rhodus, hie salta!h As there exists a Parliamentary provision forbidding these stocks to be

[^1]: a Here and below the quotations are from Benjamin Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on April 8, 1853 (The Times, No. 21398, April 9, 1853).— Ed

[^2]: Words addressed to a braggart in a tale by Aesop. He boasted of his leaps on the Island of Rhodes.— Ed





**[p. 54]**

1. They may exchange every £100 of 3 per cent, stock for an Exchequer Bond of the like amount, bearing interest at the rate of 23/4 per cent, until 1864, and then at the rate of 2V2 per cent, until 1894. If the whole of the £30,000,000 Exchequer Bonds at 272 per cent, should thus replace £30,000,000 of 3 per cent, there would be a saving in the first ten years of £75,000, and after the first ten years ol £150,000—together £225,000; but Government would be bound to repay the whole of the £30,000,000. In any case this is not a proposition to deal largely with the public debt.

2. The second proposal is, that the holders of stock shall obtain for every £100 in 3 per cent. £82 10s. in new stock at 3V2 per cent., which shall be paid at the rate of 3V2 per cent, until the 5th January, 1894. The result of this would be to give a present income to the persons accepting the 3V2 per cent, stock of £2 17s. 9d., instead of £3. Here then is a reduction of 2s. 3d. annually in every £100. If the £500,000,000 were all converted upon this proposal, the result would be that instead of paying as at present £15,000,000 a-year, the nation would only pay £14,437,500, and this would be a gain of £562,500 a-year. But for this small saving of £562,500 Parliament would tie up its hands for half a century and guaranty a higher interest than 2 4-5 per cent, at a time of transition and of utter uncertainty as to the future standard rate of interest. On the other hand, one thing at least would be gained for Mr. Gladstone. At the expiration of 40 years, he would not be troubled with a 3 per cent, stock, being defended, as now, by a twelve months' notice. He would only have to deal with the 3V2 per cent, stock redeemable at par by Parliament. Gladstone proposes not to fix any limit on his 3V2 per cent, stock.

3. The third proposal is that the holders of every £100 3 per cent, should receive £110 in a new stock of 2V2 per cent, until 1894. When Mr. Gladstone introduced his plan in the House of Commons on the 8th April, he had not limited the amount (the 2V2 per cents.) to be issued. But Mr. Disraeli having pointed out that, contrasting this proposal with the two other modes proposed, every man in his senses would choose the conversion of £100 into 2V2 per cents., and that by ihe conversion of the whole £500,000,000 3 per cents, into the new stock, the country would



**[p. 55]**

gain on one side £1,250,000 per annum, but be saddled on the other side with an addition to the capital of the public debt of £50,000,000, Mr. Gladstone on the following day altered this proposition and proposed to limit this new 2V2 stock to £30,000,000. By this alteration the whole of the third proposal loses its significance with respect to the public debt. The capital of that debt would be augmented only by £3,000,000.

Here you have "one of the most important and gigantic financial proposals that has ever been brought forward."3 There exists perhaps in general no greater humbug than the so-called Finance. The most simple operations on the Budget and the Public Debt are clothed by the adepts of that occult science in an abstruse terminology, concealing the trivial maneuvers of creating various denominations of stocks—the commutation of old stocks into new ones, the diminishing the interest and raising the nominal capital, the raising the interest and reducing the capital, the installing of premiums, of bonus, priority-shares, the distinc- tions between redeemable and irredeemable annuities, the artificial graduation in the facility of transferring the various descriptions of paper—in a manner which quite bamboozles the public with these detestable stock-jobbing scholastics and frightful complexity of details, while the usurers obtain with every such new scheme an eagerly seized opportunity for developing their mischievous and predatory activity. On the other hand, the political economist finds in all this apparent intricacy of commutations, permutations and combinations, not so much a matter of financial policy as a simple question of arithmetic or of mere phraseology.

Mr. Gladstone is certainly a master in this sort of financial alchymics, and his scheme cannot be better characterized, than in the words of Mr. Disraeli:

You will remember that I stated that the end of Mr. Gladstone's plan was the establishment of a "normal" 2V2 per cent, stock. Now-, in order to achieve this end, he creates a very limited 2V2

[^1]: "More complicated and ingenious machinery, to produce so slight a result, appeared to him never to have been devised by the subtlety and genius of the most skilful casuist. In St. Thomas Aquinasb there was a chapter that speculated upon the question of how many angels could dance on the point of a needle. It was one of the rarest productions of human genius; and he recognised in these resolutions something of that master mind."

[^2]: A quotation from the speech of Edward Ellice, M.P. from Coventry, cited by Benjamin Disraeli in his House of Commons speech on April 8, 1853.— Ed Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica.—Ed.





**[p. 56]**

The position of the Coalition Ministry in the House, is clearly shown by the statistics of votes. On the question of Maynooth52 in a large house, it had but the narrow majority of 30. On the Jewish Disabilities Bill (not yet carried through, the third reading), in a house of 439 members, its majority amounted not even to 30 votes. In the Canada Reserves Bill, when Russell withdrew his own third clause, the Ministers were saved by the Tories from their own supporters. Their majority was almost entirely supplied from the benches of the Conservatives.

I shall not dwell on the internal dissensions of the Cabinet, which appeared in the debates on the Canada Bill, in the hot controversy of the ministerial papers with regard to the Income- Tax, and above all, in their foreign policy. There is not one single question to which the Coalition Ministry might not answer, as did Gaysa, the Magyar king, who, after having been converted to Christianity, continued, notwithstanding, to observe the rites of his ancient superstition. When questioned to which of the two faiths he really belonged, he replied: "I am rich enough to belong to two sorts of faith."

[^1]: Written on April 12, 1853

[^2]: First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3753, April 27, 1853; re printed in the Semi-Weekly Tribune, No 827, April 29, 1853

[^3]: Signed: Karl Marx

[^4]: Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune



