---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "June 1853"
Page_Range: "146-194"
---

# June 1853



**[p. 115]**

Karl Marx

THE RUSSIAN HUMBUG.—GLADSTONE'S FAILURE.—

SIR CHARLES WOOD'S EAST INDIAN REFORMS98

London, Tuesday, June 7,a 1853

According to a dispatch from Berne, the Bundesrathb has cancelled the judgment pronounced by the Court Martial at Fribourg against the late insurrectionists, ordering them to be brought before the Ordinary Courts, unless they should be pardoned by the Cantonal Council. Here, then, we have the first of the heroic deeds accompanying the "rupture between Switzer- land and Austria," the infallible result of which I traced in a former letter on the European "Model Republic."c

In transmitting to you the news of the Prussian Government having ordered several Artillery officers on furlough abroad to return immediately to their duties, I stated, by mistake, that those officers were engaged in instructing the Russian army, while I intended to have said the Turkish artillery, in field-practice."

All the Russian Generals, and other Russians residing at Paris have received orders to return to Russia without delay. The language adopted by M. de Kisseleff, the Russian Envoy at Paris, is rather menacing, and letters from Petersburg are ostentatiously shown by him, in which the Turkish question is treated assez cavalièrement.0 A rumor has issued from the same quarter, report- ing that Russia demands from Persia the cession of the territory of Astrabad, at the south-eastern extremity of the Caspian Sea. Russian merchants, at the same time, dispatch, or are reported to have dispatched, orders to their London agents, "not to press any sales of grain at the present juncture, as prices were expected to rise in the imminent eventuality of a war." Lastly, confidential hints are being communicated to every newspaper, that the Rus-

[^1]: The New-York Daily Tribune erroneously has "Saturday, May 7".— Ed.

[^2]: Federal Council.— Ed. See this volume, pp. 107-08.— Ed.

[^3]: Too freely.— Ed.





**[p. 116]**

These, and a lot of similar reports, communications, etc., are nothing but so many ridiculous attempts on the part of the Rus- sian agents to strike a wholesome terror into the western world, and to push it to the continuance of that policy of extension, under the cover of which Russia hopes, as heretofore, to carry out her projects upon the East. How systematically this game of mystifica- tion is being played, may be seen from the following:

Last week, several French papers notoriously in the pay of Russia, made the discovery, that the

"real question was less between Russia and Turkey than between Petersburg and Moscow—i.e. between the Czar and the Old-Russian party; and that for the autocrat, there would be less danger in war, than in the vengeance of that conquest-urging party, which has so often shown how it deals with monarchs that displease it."c

Prince Menchikoff, of course, is the "head of this party." The Times and most of the English papers did not fail to reproduce this absurd statement, the one in consciousness of its meaning; the others, perhaps, its unconscious dupes. Now, what conclusion was the public intended to draw from this novel revelation? That Nicholas, in retreating under ridicule, and abandoning his warlike attitude against Turkey, has won a victory over his own warlike Old-Russians, or that Nicholas, in actually going to war, only does so from the necessity of yielding to that (fabulous) party. At all events, "there would only be a victory of Moscow over Petersburg, or of Petersburg over Moscow;" and, consequently, none of Europe over Russia.

Respecting this famous Old-Russian party, I happen to know from several well-informed Russians, aristocrats themselves, with whom I have had much intercourse at Paris, that it has long been entirely extinct, and is only occasionally called back into apparent existence, when the Czar stands in need of some bugbear to frighten the West of Europe into passive endurance of his arrogant claims. Hence the resurrection of a Menchikoff, and his appropriate outfit in the

[^1]: a M.Cola.— Ed.

[^2]: Allgemeine Zeitung.— Ed. Quoted, with slight changes, from The Times, No. 21446, June 4, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 117]**

Besides these different spectres conjured up by Russian diplo- macy, for the misguidance of England and France, another attempt to bring about the same result has just been made, by the publica- tion of a work entitled, L'Empire Russe depuis le Congrès de Vienne, by Viscount de Beaumont-Vassy. It will be sufficient to extract one sentence only, for the purpose of characterising this opusculum:

"It is well known that a deposit of coin and ingots exists in the cellar of the fortress of St. Peter and St. Paul. This hidden treasure was officially estimated, on the 1st of January, 1850, at 99,763,361 silver rubles."3

Has any one ever presumed to speak of the hidden treasure in the Bank of England? The "hidden treasure" of Russia is simply the metal reserve balancing a three times larger circulation of convert- ible notes, not to speak of the hidden amount of inconvertible paper issued by the Imperial Treasury. But, perhaps, this treasure may yet be called a "hidden" one, inasmuch as nobody has ever seen it, except the few Petersburg merchants selected by the Czar's Government for the annual inspection of the bags which hide it.

The chief demonstration of Russia in this direction is, however, an article published in the Journal des Débats, and signed by M. de St.-Marc Girardin, that old Orleanist sage. I extract:

As a matter of course, M. de St.-Marc Girardin concludes in favor of peace on any condition against the social revolution, forgetting, however, that the Emperor of Russia has, at least, as much "horreur" of the revolution as he himself and his proprie- tor, M. Bertin.

Notwithstanding all these soporifics, administered by Russian diplomacy to the Press and people of England, "that old and

[^1]: "Europe has two great perils, according to us: Russia, which menaces her independence; and the Revolution, which menaces her social order. Now, she cannot be saved from one of these perils except by exposing herself entirely to the other. [] Does Europe believe that the knot of her independence, and especially of the independence of the Continent, is at Constantinople, and that it is there that the question must be boldly decided; then, that is war against Russia. In that war France and England would struggle to establish the independence of Europe. What would Germany do? We know not. But what we know is, that in the present state of Europe, war would be the social revolution."

[^2]: A quotation from Viscount de Beaumont-Vassy's book as cited by The Times, No. 21446, June 4, 1853.—Erf.





**[p. 118]**

The Danish (once Schleswig-Holstein) question is beginning to create considerable interest in England, since the English Press, too, has at length discovered that it involves the same principle of Russian extension, as supplies the foundation of the Eastern complication. Mr. Urquhart, M.P., the well-known admirer of Turkey and Eastern Institutions, has published a pamphlet on the Danish Succession,3 of which an account will be given in a future letter.100 The chief argument put forward in this publication is that the Sound is intended by Russia to perform the same functions for her in the North as the Dardanelles in the South, viz., the securing her maritime supremacy over the Baltic, in the same manner as the occupation of the Dardanelles would do with regard to the Euxine.

Some time since I gave you my opinion that the rate of interest would rise in England, and that such an occurrence would have an unfavorable effect on Mr. Gladstone's financial projects.15 Now, the minimum rate of discount has in the past week been actually raised by the Bank of England from 3 per cent, to 3 72 per cent., and the failure I predicted for Mr. Gladstone's scheme of conversion has become already a fact, as you may see from the following statement:

[^1]: BANK OF ENGLAND, Thursday, June 2, 1853 Amount of new stock accepted until this day:

[^2]: 3V2 per cent £138,082 0/ 3 2V2 per cent 1,537,100 10/10 Exchange Bonds 4,200 0/ 0

[^3]: Total £1,679,382 11/1 SOUTH SEA HOUSE,101 Thursday, June 2, 1853

[^4]: Amount of convertible annuities till this day:

[^5]: For 3V2 per cent annuities £17,504 12/8 For 2 V2 per cent annuities 986,528 5/7 Exchequer Bonds 5,270 18/4

[^6]: Total £ 1,009,303 16/7

[^7]: The reference is to the section, "The Danish Succession", in David Urquhart's pamphlet, Progress of Russia in the West, North and South.— Ed. See this volume, p. 102.— Ed.





**[p. 119]**

Lord John Russell, in the debate on the Ecclesiastical Revenues of Ireland (House of Commons, 31st ult.), expressed himself as follows:

[^1]: "It has been evident, of late years, that the Roman Catholic Clergy—looking to its proceedings in this country—looking to that church acting under the direction of its head,3 who himself a foreign sovereign, has aimed at political power [hear! hear!], which appears to me to be at variance with the due attachment to the Crown of this country [hear! hear!]—with the due attachment to the general cause of liberty—with the due attachment to the duties a subject of the State should perform toward it—now, as I wish to speak with as much frankness as the honorable gentleman who spoke last, let me not be misunderstood in this House. I am far from denying that there are many members of this House, and many members of the Roman Catholic persuasion, both in this country and in Ireland, who are attached to the Throne, and to the liberties of this country; but what I am saying, and that of which I am convinced, is, that if the Roman Catholic clergy had increased power given to them, and if they, as ecclesiastics, were to exercise greater control and greater political influence they do now, that power would not be exercised in accordance with the general freedom that prevails in this country— [Hurrah!] —and that neither in respect of political power, nor upon other subjects, would they favor that general freedom of discussion and that activity and energy of the human mind, that belongs to the spirit of the constitution of this country. [Flourish of trumpets!] I do not think that, in that respect, they are upon a par with the Presbyterians of Scotland [bagpipes!], the Wesleyans of this country, and the Established Church of this country. [General rapture.] I am obliged, then, to conclude, most unwillingly to conclude, but most decidedly, that the endowment of

[^2]: a Pope Pius IX.— Ed F. Lucas.— Ed.





**[p. 120]**

Two days after this speech of Lord John, in which he attempted for the six-thousandth time, to make a show of his love of "general freedom," by his zealous genuflexions before particular sects of Protestant bigotry, Messrs. Sadleir, Keogh, and Monsell gave in their resignations to the Coalition Ministry, in a letter addressed by Mr. Monsell to My Lord Aberdeen. My Lord Aberdeen in his answer dated 3d June, assures these gentlemen that

"The reasons given by Lord John Russell and the sentiments of which you complain, are not shared by me, nor by many of my colleagues Lord John Russell desires me to say, that he did not impute want of loyalty to the Roman Catholics."

Messrs. Sadleir, Keogh and Monsell accordingly withdrew their resignations, and the arrangements for a general reconciliation passed off last night in Parliament, "to the greatest satisfaction of Lord John Russell."

The last India Bill of 1783 proved fatal to the Coalition Cabinet of Mr. Fox and Lord North. The new India Bill of 1853 is likely to prove fatal for the Coalition Cabinet of Mr. Gladstone and Lord John Russell. But if the former were thrown overboard, because of their attempt to abolish the Courts of Directors and of Proprietors, the latter are threatened with a similar fate for the opposite reason. On June 3, Sir Charles Wood moved for leave to bring in a bill to provide for the Government of India. Sir Charles commenced by excusing the anomalous length of the speech he was about to deliver, by the "magnitude of the subject," and "the 150,000,000 of souls he had to deal with."c For every 30,000,000 of his fellow-subjects, Sir Charles could do no less than sacrifice one hour's breath. But why this precipitate legislation on that "great subject," while you postpone it "for even the most trifling matters?" Because the Charter of the East India Company expires on the 30th April, 1854. But why not pass a temporary

[^1]: John Russell's speech is quoted, with slight changes, from the report in The Times,No. 21443, June 1, 1853.—Ed. b See The Times,No. 21447, June 6, 1853.— Ed. Here and below Charles Wood's speech is quoted from the report in The Times, No. 21446, June 4, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 121]**

"measure which he has to submit is, so far as legislation goes, comprised in a very small compass."

After this introduction Sir Charles delivered himself of an apology for the administration of India for the last twenty years. "We must look at India with somewhat of an Indian eye" — which Indian eye seems to have the particular gift of seeing everything bright on the part of England and everything black on the side of India.

(Perhaps there is a Whig Coalition party in India.)

With regard to the Public Works, the Government intends to undertake some of "the greatest magnitude and importance." With regard to the tenure of lands, Sir Charles proves very successfully that its three existing forms—the Zemindari, the Ryotwari, and the Village systems — are only so many forms of fiscal exploitation in the hands of the Company,3 none of which could well be made general, nor deserved to be made so. An idea of establishing another form, of an altogether opposite character, does not in the least preoccupy the mind of Sir Charles.

[^1]: "In India you have a race of people slow of change, bound up by religious prejudices and antiquated customs. There are [],in fact, [] all obstacles to rapid progress."

[^2]: "The points," said Sir Charles Wood, "upon which the greatest stress has been laid, and which are the heads of the complaints contained in the petitions presented to the Committee, relate to the administration of justice, the want of public works, and the tenure of land."

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 213-16.— Ed.





**[p. 122]**

And now, in order to prove the hard labor of providing for the administration of justice in India, Sir Charles relates that already, as early as 1833, a Law Commission was appointed in India. But in what manner did this Commission act, according to Sir Charles Wood's own testimony? The first and last result of the labors of that Commission was a penal code, prepared under the auspices of Mr. Macaulay. This code was sent to the various local authorities in India, which sent it back to Calcutta, from which it was sent to England, to be again returned from England to India. In India, Mr. Macaulay having been replaced as legislative counsel by Mr. Bethune, the code was totally altered, and on this plea the Governor-General, not being then of opinion "that delay is a source of weakness and danger," sent it back to England, and from England it was returned to the Governor-General, with authority to pass the code in whatever shape he thought best. But now, Mr. Bethune having died, the Governor-General thought best to submit the code to a third English lawyer,3 and to a lawyer who knew nothing about the habits and customs of the Hindoos, reserving himself the right of afterward rejecting a code concocted by wholly incompetent authority. Such have been the adventures of that yet unborn code. As to the technical absurdities of the law in India, Sir Charles takes his stand on the no less absurd technicalities of the English law-procedure itself; but while affirming the perfect incorruptibility of the English judges in India, he nevertheless is ready to sacrifice them by an alteration in the manner of nominating them. The general progress of India is demonstrated by a comparison of the present state of Delhi with that under the invasion of Khuli-Khan. The salt-tax is justified by the arguments of the most renowned political economists, all of whom have advised taxation to be laid on some article of first neces- sity. But Sir Charles does not add what those same economists would have said, on finding that in the two years from 1849-'50, and 1851-'52, there had been a decrease in the consumption of salt, of 60,000 tuns, a loss of revenue to the amount of £415,000, the total salt revenue amounting to £2,000,000. The measures proposed by Sir Charles, and "comprised in a very small compass," are:

[^1]: B. Peacock.— Ed.





**[p. 123]**

2. The revenue of Directors to be raised from £300 to £500 a year, the Chairman to receive £1,000.

3. All the ordinary appointments in the civil service, and all the scientific in the military service of India, to be thrown open to public competition, leaving to the Directors the nomination to the Cadetships in the Cavalry-of-the-Line.

4. The Governor-Generalship to be separated from the Gover- norship of Bengal, and power to be given to the Supreme Govern- ment to constitute a new Presidency in the districts on the Indus.

5. And lastly, the whole of this measure only to continue until the Parliament shall provide otherwise.

The speech and measure of Sir Charles Wood was subjected to a very strong and satirical criticism by Mr. Bright, whose picture of India ruined by the fiscal exertions of the Company and Government did not, of course, receive the supplement of India ruined by Manchester and Free Trade. As to last night's speech of an old East-Indiaman, Sir J. Hogg, Director or ex-Director of the Company, I really suspect that I have met with it already in 1701, 1730, 1743, 1769, 1772, 1781, 1783, 1784, 1793, 1813, etc., and am induced, by way of answer to his directorial panegyric, to quote merely a few facts from the annual Indian accounts published, I believe, under his own superintendence.

[^1]: Total Net-Revenues of India

[^2]: 1849-'50 £20,275,831 ] Loss of Revenue within 1850-'51 20,249,932 Y three years, £348,792 1851-'52 19,927,039 J

[^3]: Total Charges

[^4]: 1849-'50 £16,687,382] Increase of expenditure 1850-'51 17,170,707 [ w i t h i n t h r e e v e a r s> I fl 214 284 1851-'52 17,901,666 J ^ ' ' Land-Tax

[^5]: Bengal oscillated in last four years from £3,500,000 to £3,560,000 North West oscillated in last four years from 4,870,000 4,900,000 Madras oscillated in last four years from 3,640,000 3,470,000 Bombay oscillated in last four years from 2,240,000 2,300,000





**[p. 124]**

Out of £19,800,000 not £166,300

have been expended on roads, canals, bridges and other works of public necessity.

Written on June 7, 1853 Reproduced from the New-York First published in the New-York Daily Daih Tribune Tribune, No. 3801, June 22, 1853'; re- printed without the section "The Russian Humbug" in the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 615, June 25, 1853

Signed: Karl Marx



**[p. 125]**

Karl Marx

THE BRITISH RULE IN INDIA'

London, Friday, June 10, 1853

Telegraphic dispatches from Vienna announce that the pacific solution of the Turkish, Sardinian and Swiss questions, is regarded there as a certainty.

Last night the debate on India was continued in the House of Commons, in the usual dull manner. Mr. Blackett charged the statements of Sir Charles Wood and Sir J. Hogg with bearing the stamp of optimist falsehood. A lot of Ministerial and Directorial advocates rebuked the charge as well as they could, and the inevitable Mr. Hume summed up by calling on Ministers to withdraw their bill. Debate adjourned.

Hindostan is an Italy of Asiatic dimensions, the Himalayas for the Alps, the Plains of Bengal for the Plains of Lombardy, the Deccan for the Apennines, and the Isle of Ceylon for the Island of Sicily. The same rich variety in the products of the soil, and the same dismemberment in the political configuration. Just as Italy has, from time to time, been compressed by the conqueror's sword into different national masses, so do we find Hindostan, when not under the pressure of the Mohammedan, or the Mogul,104 or the Briton, dissolved into as many independent and conflicting States as it numbered towns, or even villages. Yet, in a social point of view, Hindostan is not the Italy, but the Ireland of the East. And this strange combination of Italy and of Ireland, of a world of voluptuousness and of a world of woes, is anticipated in the ancient traditions of the religion of Hindostan. That religion is at once a religion of sensualist exuberance, and a religion of



**[p. 126]**

I share not the opinion of those who believe in a golden age of Hindostan, without recurring, however, like Sir Charles Wood, for the confirmation of my view, to the authority of Khuli-Khan.a But take, for example, the times of Aurangzeb; or the epoch, when the Mogul appeared in the North, and the Portuguese in the South; or the age of Mohammedan invasion, and of the Hep- tarchy in Southern India106; or, if you will, go still more back to antiquity, take the mythological chronology of the Brahman himself, who places the commencement of Indian misery in an epoch even more remote than the Christian creation of the world.

There cannot, however, remain any doubt but that the misery inflicted by the British on Hindostan is of an essentially different and infinitely more intensive kind than all Hindostan had to suffer before. I do not allude to European despotism, planted upon Asiatic despotism, by the British East India Company, forming a more monstrous combination than any of the divine monsters startling us in the Temple of Salsette.107 This is no distinctive feature of British Colonial rule, but only an imitation of the Dutch, and so much so that in order to characterise the working of the British East India Company, it is sufficient to literally repeat what Sir Stamford Raffles, the English Governor of Java, said of the old Dutch East India Company:

All the civil wars, invasions, revolutions, conquests, famines, strangely complex, rapid, and destructive as the successive action in Hindostan may appear, did not go deeper than its surface. England has broken down the entire framework of Indian society, without any symptoms of reconstitution yet appearing. This loss of his old world, with no gain of a new one, imparts a particular kind of melancholy to the present misery of the Hindoo, and separates

[^1]: "The Dutch Company, actuated solely by the spirit of gain, and viewing their [Javan] subjects, with less regard or consideration than a West India planter formerly viewed a gang upon his estate, because the latter had paid the purchase money of human property, which the other had not, employed all the existing machinery of despotism to squeeze from the people their utmost mite of contribution, the last dregs of their labor, and thus aggravated the evils of a capricious and semi-barbarous Government, by working it with all the practised ingenuity of politicians, and all the monopolizing selfishness of traders."

[^2]: See this volume, p. 122.— Ed. Th. S. Raffles, The History of Java, Vol. 1, p. 151.— Ed.





**[p. 127]**

Hindustan, ruled by Britain, from all its ancient traditions, and from the whole of its past history.

There have been in Asia, generally, from immemorial times, but three departments of Government; that of Finance, or the plunder of the interior; that of War, or the plunder of the exterior; and, finally, the department of Public Works. Climate and territorial conditions, especially the vast tracts of desert, extending from the Sahara, through Arabia, Persia, India, and Tartary, to the most elevated Asiatic highlands, constituted artificial irrigation by canals and water-works the basis of Oriental agriculture. As in Egypt and India, inundations are used for fertilizing the soil in Mesopotamia, Persia, &c; advantage is taken of a high level for feeding irrigative canals. This prime necessity of an economical and common use of water, which, in the Occident, drove private enterprise to voluntary association, as in Flanders and Italy, necessitated, in the Orient where civilization was too low and the territorial extent too vast to call into life voluntary association, the interference of the centralizing power of Government. Hence an economical function devolved upon all Asiatic Governments, the function of providing public works. This artificial fertilization of the soil, dependent on a Central Government, and immediately decaying with the neglect of irrigation and drainage, explains the otherwise strange fact that we now find whole territories barren and desert that were once brilliantly cultivated, as Palmyra, Petra, the ruins in Yemen, and large provinces of Egypt, Persia, and Hindustan; it also explains how a single war of devastation has been able to de- populate a country for centuries, and to strip it of all its civi- lization.

Now, the British in East India accepted from their predecessors the department of finance and of war, but they have neglected entirely that of public works. Hence the deterioration of an agriculture which is not capable of being conducted on the British principle of free competition, of laissez-faire and laissez-aller? But in Asiatic empires we are quite accustomed to see agriculture deteriorating under one government and reviving again under some other government. There the harvests correspond to good or bad government, as they change in Europe with good or bad seasons. Thus the oppression and neglect of agriculture, bad as it is, could not be looked upon as the final blow dealt to Indian

[^1]: a Laissez-faire, laissez-aller was the formula of the advocates of free trade and non-intervention of the state in economic relations.— Ed.





**[p. 128]**

These two circumstances—the Hindoo, on the one hand, leaving, like all Oriental peoples, to the Central Government the care of the great public works, the prime condition of his agriculture and commerce, dispersed, on the other hand, over the surface of the country, and agglomerated in small centers by the domestic union of agricultural and manufacturing pursuits—these two circumstances had brought about, since the remotest times, a social system of particular features—the so-called village system, which gave to each of these small unions their independent organization and distinct life. The peculiar character of this system may be judged from the following description, contained in an old official report of the British House of Commons on Indian affairs:

The Britfoli Rale In lasllat.

_ _ . tiday. June 10, IS5S. Telegraphic dispatches from Vinuua announce that the pacific solution of the Turkish, Sardinian and Swiss questions, if« regarded there as a certainty.

Lnst flight the debate on India was continued in the House of Commons, in the usual dull manner. Mr. Blaekett charged tho statements of Sir Charles Wood and Sir J . Hogg with bearing the stamp of optimise falsehood. A lot of Ministerial and Directorial advo- cates rebuked the charge aa well as they could, and the ineviiable Mr. Hume summed up by calling OQ Ministers to withdraw their bill. Debate adjourned. iliixlowtnu is an Italy of Asiatic dimensions, the Himalayas (or the Alps tho Pia ins of Bengal for the Plsins of Lomhardv, thw Deccan for the Appenines, «id the Isle of Ceylon for the Island of Sicily. The name rich variety in the products of the soil, and tho name dismemberment in the political configuration. Just its Italy lias, from time to time, been compressed by the conqueror's sword into different national masses, so du we lind Hindost an, when not under the pressure of tbe Mohammedan or the Mogul, or the Briton, dis- solved into as many independent and conflicting States as it numhercd towns, er even villages. Yet, in a social point of view, Hindostan is wot the Italy, but the Ire- land of the East And this strange combination of Italy and of Ireland,ofa world of voluptuousness and of a world of wees, is anticipated in the ancient traditions of the religion of Ifindostan. That religion is at once a religion of sensualist exuberance, and a religion of solf- torturin^ascetism;A religion of the Lingam and of the Juggernaut; the religion of the Monk, and of the Baya- dere.

I nbtire not the opinion of those who bolievo in a golden age of Hindnstan, without recurring, however, like Sir Charles Wood, for the confirmation of my view, to the authority of Khuli-Khan. But take, for example, the times of Aumng-Zebc; or the epoch, when the Mogul ttppcaredin the North, and the Portuguese in the South; or the nge of Mohammedan invasion, ami of the Heptarchy in Southern India; or, if you will, go still more back to nn Uquity.takc the mythological chronology of the Bruhnjito himself, who places the commencement of Indian miser)' in an epoch even more remote thau the Christian csenrion of the world.

injured,

families have continued for ages. The inhabitant* themselves no trouhl^ about the hre:>kin^ up and <1IVI of kingdoms; while tlm village remain* entire, the not to what power it is transferred, or to what sover devolves; itn internal economy remain"« unchanged porail is still th« hem! inhabitant, and still acts an the petty •*?.;.

udge or magistrate, and collector or rent or of the vil- la««."

These small stereotype forms of social organism hive been to the greater part dissolved, nnd are disappearing, not so much through the brutal interference of the Brit- ish tax-gatherer and the It rit lob. soldier, as to the working of English steam and English free trade. Those family-communities wero based on domestic in- dustry, in that peculiar combination of hand-weaving, hand-spinning and hand-titling agriculture which gave them self-supporting power. English interference hav- ing placed the spinner in Lancashire and the weaver in Bengal, or sweeping away both Hindoo spinner and weaver, dissolved theuc small neini barbaric, semi-civ- ilized communities, by blowing up their economical basis, and thus produced tho greatest, and to speak the truth, the only social revolution ever heard of iu Asia.

Now, sickening as it must be to human feelimr t) wit- ness those myriads nf industrious patriarchal und inof- fensive social organizations disorgtfuized and dissolved into their units, thrown into a sea of woes, and their . individual members login» at the same time their an- cient form of civilization, and their hereditary means of Bubsbtrnce, we muet not forget thn t, these idyllic village- corn munit iea, inoffensive though they may appear, had always been the solid foundation of Oriental despotism, that they restrained tbe human mind within the smallest possible compass, making it the unresisting tool of superstition, enslaving it beneath traditional rule*, depriving it of all grandeur und historical energies. W e must not forget the barbarian egotism which, concentra- ting on sonic miserable patch of land, had q/iietlv wit- nessed the ruin of empires, tbe perpetration of unspeak- able cruelties, the massacre of tho population of largo towns, with no other consideration bestoivcd upon thorn tli HD on natural events, itself the helpless proy of any aggressor who deigned to notice it at al L W e mast not forptt that tliitt undignified, stagnatory, and vegetatire lifii, that this passive sort of existence evoked on the other i«rt, jn contradistinction,vtild, aimless, unbounded forces of destruction and rendered murder itself a reli- gious rite in Hindostan. W e must not forget that these little communities were contaminated by distinctions of caste and by slavery, that they subjugated man to external circumstances instead of elevating miu tbe sovereign of circumstances, that they trans- formed a self-developing social state info never chang- ing natural destiny, and thus brought about a bru- talizing worship of nature, exhibiting its degradation in tbe fact that man, the sovereign of nature, fell down on his knees in adoration of Kann man, the monkey, and Sabbala.tbecow.

[^1]: There cannot, however, remain any doubt but that tbe mi sen* inflicted by the British on Hindostan is of an essentially dureront ami infinitely moro intensive kind ihan all Hindustan had to suffer before. I do not allude to European despotism, planted upon Asiatic despotism, by the British East India Company, forming a more monstrous combination than anv of tbe divine mounters startling us in the Temple of Snlsette. This is a<> dis- tinctive feature of British Colonial rule, but only an imitation of the Dutch, and so much so that in order to characterise the working of the British East India Com- pany, it is sufficient to literally repeat what Sir Stamford Ratlin, the English Governor of Java, said of tbe old Dutch Hast India Company :

[^2]: " The Dutch Company, actuated solely by the spirit of g*»ii>. and viewi Bjr their »abjects, with less regard or coa- »ideration than a West India planter former!* viewed a Kinj upon his estate, because the Jitter had paid the pur chase mor<ev of human property, which the other bad not, employed all tbe existing machinery of despotism to squeeze from the people, their utmost mite of coutribatien, tb« last drvgs of their labor, and thus aggravated tbe evils of a capricious and semi barbarous Government, by work- in** it with all tb« practised iagennitv of politicians, and all the monopolising »)fl-hneas of traders."

[^3]: AH the civil vara, invasions, involutions, conquests, famines, strangely complex, rapid, and destructive aa tbe socceasive*action in Hiniioatan n a y appear, did not go deeper than its surface. England has broken down the entire framework of Indian society, without any symptom« of reconstitution yet appearing. This lots of hi» old world, with no gain of a new one, imparts a par- ticular kind of meiaocboly to tbe pnoeat muery of the Hindoo, and separates Hindoataa, ruled by Britain,from all its ancient traditions, and from the whole of ita past bistory-

[^4]: Tbcro nave been in Asia, generally, from immemorial time», bnt three departments of Government ; that of F Inane*, or the planter of the interior : that of War,

[^5]: England, it is true, in causing a social revolution in Hindostan, was actuated only by tbe vilest interests, and was stupid iu ber manner of enforcing them. But that is not the question. T h e question is. can mankind fulfil its destiny without a fundamental revolution in the social state of Asia? .If not, whatever may have been the crimes of Engla Lo V she was the unconscious tool of his tory in bringing about that révolution.

[^6]: Then, whatever bitterness the spectacle of the crumb- ling of an ancient world may have for our personal feel- ing«, we have the right, in point of history, to exclaim with Goethe:

[^7]: " MU« éiw Qui *na qatlaa Da «e MUH Ltw* vnnakrt. Hat nlcbt myriades 8»*Wn

[^8]: Km. Mux. Tt Mjia H«tmtaft

[^9]: TURKEY AND RUSSIA

[^10]: Part of a page of the New-York Daily Tribune with Marx's article "The British Rule in India"







**[p. 131]**

These small stereotype forms of social organism have been to the greater part dissolved, and are disappearing, not so much through the brutal interference of the British tax-gatherer and the British soldier, as to the working of English steam and English free trade. Those family-communities were based on domestic industry, in that peculiar combination of hand-weaving, hand- spinning and hand-tilling agriculture which gave them self- supporting power. English interference having placed the spinner in Lancashire and the weaver in Bengal, or sweeping away both Hindoo spinner and weaver, dissolved these small semi-barbarian, semi-civilized communities, by blowing up their economical basis,

[^1]: a "Report of the Committee of the House of Commons" published in 1812; quoted from Th. S. Raffles' The History of Java, Vol. 1, p. 285.— Ed.

[^2]: 6*





**[p. 132]**

Now, sickening as it must be to human feeling to witness those myriads of industrious patriarchal and inoffensive social organiza- tions disorganized and dissolved into their units, thrown into a sea of woes, and their individual members losing at the same time their ancient form of civilization, and their hereditary means of subsistence, we must not forget that these idyllic village-communities, inoffensive though they may appear, had always been the solid foundation of Oriental despotism, that they restrained the human mind within the smallest possible compass, making it the unresisting tool of superstition, enslaving it beneath traditional rules, depriving it of all grandeur and historical energies. We must not forget the barbarian egotism which, concentrating on some miserable patch of land, had quietly witnessed the ruin of empires, the perpetration of unspeakable cruelties, the massacre of the population of large towns, with no other consideration bestowed upon them than on natural events, itself the helpless prey of any aggressor who deigned to notice it at all. We must not forget that this undignified, stagnatory, and vegetative life, that this pas- sive sort of existence evoked on the other part, in contradistinc- tion, wild, aimless, unbounded forces of destruction and rendered murder itself a religious rite in Hindostan. We must not forget that these little communities were contaminated by distinctions of caste and by slavery, that they subjugated man to external circumstances instead of elevating man the sovereign of cir- cumstances, that they transformed a self-developing social state into never changing natural destiny, and thus brought about a brutalizing worship of nature, exhibiting its degradation in the fact that man, the sovereign of nature, fell down on his knees in adoration of Kanuman, the monkey, and Sabbala, the cow.

England, it is true, in causing a social revolution in Hindostan, was actuated only by the vilest interests, and was stupid in her manner of enforcing them. But that is not ' the question. The question is, can mankind fulfil its destiny without a fundamental revolution in the social state of Asia? If not, whatever may have been the crimes of England she was the unconscious tool of history in bringing about that revolution.

Then, whatever bitterness the spectacle of the crumbling of an ancient world may have for our personal feelings, we have the right, in point of history, to exclaim with Goethe:



**[p. 133]**

Written on June 10, 1853 Reproduced from the New-York First published in the New-York Daily Dail J Tribune Tribune, No. 3804, June 25, 1853; re- printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 844, June 28, and the New- York Weekly Tribune, No. 616, Juif 2, 1853 Signed: Karl Marx

[^1]: "Should this torture then torment us Since it brings us greater pleasure? Were not through the rule of Timur Souls devoured without measure?"

[^2]: From Goethe's "An Suleika", Westöstlicher

[^3]: Diwan.—Ed.





**[p. 134]**

Karl Marx

ENGLISH PROSPERITY.—STRIKES.— THE TURKISH QUESTION.—INDIA101

London, Friday, June 17, 1853

The declared value of British exports for the month of

April, 1853, amounts to £7,578,910 Against, for April, 1852 5,268,915 For four months ending April 30 [ 1853] 27,970,633 Against the same months of 1852 21,844,663

Showing an increase, in the former instance, of £2,309,995, or upward of 40 per cent.; and in the latter of £6,125,970, or nearly 28 per cent. Supposing the increase to continue at the same rate, the total exports of Great Britain would amount, at the close of 1853, to more than £100,000,000.

The Times, in communicating these startling items to its readers, indulged in a kind of dithyrambics, concluding with the words: "We are all happy, and all united."3 This agreeable discovery had no sooner been trumpeted forth, than an almost general system of strikes burst over the whole surface of England, particularly in the industrial North, giving a strange echo to the song of harmony tuned by The Times. These strikes are the necessary consequence of a comparative decrease in the labor-surplus, coinciding with a general rise in the prices of the first necessaries. 5,000 hands struck at Liverpool, 35,000 at Stockport, and so on, until at length the very police force was seized by the epidemic, and 250

[^1]: a The Times,No. 21449, June 8, 1853.—Ed.





**[p. 135]**



[^1]: "My Dear Marx: To-morrow, I start for Blackstone-Edge, where a camp-meet- ing of the Chartists of Yorkshire and Lancashire is to take place, and I am happy to inform you that the most extensive preparations for the same are making in the North. It is now seven years since a really national gathering took place on that spot sacred to the traditions of the Chartist movement, and the object of the present gathering is as follows: Through the treacheries and divisions of 1848, the disruption of the organization then existing, by the incarceration and banishment of 500 of its leading men—through the thinning of its ranks by emigration — through the deadening of political energy by the influences of brisk trade — the national movement of Chartism had converted itself into isolated action, and the organization dwindled at the very time that social knowledge spread. Meanwhile, a labor movement rose on the ruins of the political one—a labor movement emanating from the first blind gropings of social knowledge. This labor movement showed itself ät first in isolated cooperative attempts; then, when these were found





**[p. 136]**

That there is no prospect at all of the intended Chartist petition being taken into consideration by Parliament, needs not to be proved by argument. Whatever illusions may have been enter- tained on this point, they must now vanish before the fact, that

[^1]: "Yours truly, Ernest Jones."





**[p. 137]**

Last Saturday The Press, a new weekly paper under the influence of Mr. Disraeli, made a curious disclosure to the public of England, as follows:

Now, The Times of yesterday had an elaborate and official article emanating from the Foreign Office, in answer to the grave charge of Mr. Disraeli, but which, in my opinion, tends rather to strengthen than to refute that charge. The Times asserts that, early in the spring, before the arrival of Prince Menchikoff at Constantinople, Baron Brunnow made a complaint to Lord John Russell, that the Porte had revoked the privileges conferred on the Greek clergy by treaty, and that Lord John Russell, conceiving the matter only to concern the Holy Places, gave his assent to the designs of the Czar. But The Times is compelled at the same time to concede that after Prince Menchikoff's arrival at Constan-

[^1]: "Early in the spring Baron Brunnow communicated to Lord Clarendon the demand which the Emperor of Russia was about to make on the Porte, that he did so with a statement that the object of the communication was to ascertain the feeling of England on the subject—that Lord Clarendon made no objection, nor in any way discouraged the intended course, and that the Muscovite diplomatist communicated to his imperial master that England was not indisposed to connive at his designs on the Golden Horn."

[^2]: a Allusion to John Russell.— Ed. b Nicholas I.— Ed. c Rendering of a passage from a report in The Press, No. 6, June 11, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 138]**

It may be of interest to your readers to become acquainted with a document concerning the Eastern question, which was recently published in a London newspaper.13 It is a proclamation issued by the Prince of Armenia, now residing in London, and distributed among the Armenians in Turkey:

"Leo, by the grace of God, sovereign Prince of Armenia, &c, to the Armenians in Turkey:

"Beloved brothers and faithful countrymen.— Our will and our ardent wish is that you should defend to the last drop of your blood your country and the Sultan against the tyrant of the North. Remember, my brothers, that in Turkey there are no knouts, they do not tear your nostrils and your women are not flogged, secretly or in public. Under the reign of the Sultan, there is humanity, while under that of the tyrant of the North there are nothing but atrocities. Therefore place yourselves under the direction of God, and fight bravely for the liberty of your country and your present sovereign. Pull down your houses to make barricades, and if you have no arms, break your furniture and defend yourselves with it. May Heaven guide you on your path to glory. My only happiness will be to fight in the midst of you against the oppressor of your country, and your creed. May God incline the Sultan's heart to sanction my demand, because under his reign, our religion remains in its pure form, while, under the Northern tyrant, it will be altered. Remember, at least, brothers, that the blood that runs in the veins of him who now addresses you, is the blood of twenty kings, it is the blood of heroes—Lusignans— and defenders of our faith; and we say to you, let us defend our creed and its pure form, until our last drop of blood."

On the 13th inst. Lord Stanley gave notice to the House of Commons that on the second reading of the India Bill (23d inst.) he would bring in the following resolution:

[^1]: "That in the opinion of this House further information is necessary to enable Parliament to legislate with advantage for the permanent government of India, and

[^2]: a Abdul Mejid.— Ed. b The Daily News, No. 2207, June 17, 1853.— Ed





**[p. 139]**

But in April, 1854, the Charter of the East India Company will expire, and something accordingly must be done in one way or the other. The Government wanted to legislate permanently; that is, to renew the Charter for twenty years more. The Manchester School wanted to postpone all legislation, by prolonging the Charter at the utmost for one year.—The Government said that permanent legislation was necessary for the "best" of India. The Manchester men replied that it was impossible for want of information. The "best" of India, and the want of information, are alike false pretences. The governing oligarchy desired, before a Reformed House should meet, to secure at the cost of India, their own "best" for twenty years to come. The Manchester men desired no legislation at all in the unreformed Parliament, where their views had no chance of success. Now, the Coalition Cabinet, through Sir Charles Wood, has, in contradiction to its former statements, but in conformity with its habitual system of shifting difficulties, brought in something that looked like legislation; but it dared not, on the other hand, to propose the renewal of the Charter for any definite period, but presented a "settlement," which it left to Parliament to unsettle whenever that body should determine to do so. If the Ministerial propositions were adopted, the East India Company would obtain no renewal, but only a suspension of life. In all other respects, the Ministerial project but apparently alters the Constitution of the India Government, the only serious novelty to be introduced being the addition of some new Governors, although a long experience has proved that the parts of East India administered by simple Commissioners, go on much better than those blessed with the costly luxury of Governors and Councils. The Whig invention of alleviating exhausted countries by burdening them with new sinecures for the paupers of aristocracy, reminds one of the old Russell administra- tion, when the Whigs were suddenly struck with the state of spiritual destitution, in which the Indians and Mahommedans of the East were living, and determined upon relieving them by the importation of some new Bishops, the Tories, in the plenitude of their power, having never thought more than one to be necessary. That resolution having been agreed upon, Sir John Hobhouse, the then Whig President of the Board of Control, discovered

[^1]: Quoted from a report in The Times,No. 21454, June 14, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 140]**

Be this as it may, the Coalition Cabinet believed it had met all clamors by leaving to Parliament the power of altering its proposed act at all times. Unfortunately in steps Lord Stanley, the Tory, with his resolution which was loudly cheered by the "Radical" Opposition, when it was announced. Lord Stanley's resolution is nevertheless self-contradictory. On one hand, he rejects the Ministerial proposition, because the House requires more information for permanent legislation. On the other hand, he rejects it, because it is no permanent legislation, but alters existing arrangements, without pretending to finality. The Conser- vative view is, of course, opposed to the bill, because it involves a change of some kind. The Radical view is opposed to it, because it involves no real change at all. Lord Stanley, in these coalescent times has found a formula in which the opposite views are combined together against the Ministerial view of the subject. The Coalition Ministry affects a virtuous indignation against such tactics, and The Chronicle, its organ, exclaims:

The anxiety of Ministers seems indeed to be serious. The Chronicle of to-day, again recurring to the subject, says:

On the other hand, we read in The Times of to-day:

[^1]: "Viewed as a party-move the proposed motion for delay is in a high degree factious and discreditable This motion is brought forward solely because some supporters of the Ministry are pledged to separate in this particular question from those with whom they usually act."3

[^2]: "The division on Lord Stanley's motion will probably be decisive of the fate of the India Bill; it is therefore of the utmost importance that those who feel the importance of early legislation, should use every exertion to strengthen the Government."

[^3]: "The fate of the Government India Bill has been more respectively delineated The danger of the Government lies in the entire conforming of Lord

[^4]: a The Morning Chronicle, No. 26981, June 15, 1853.— Ed. b The Morning Chronicle, No. 26983, June 17, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 141]**

I shall expose in a subsequent letter,b the bearing of the Indian Question on the different parties in Great Britain, and the benefit the poor Hindoo may reap from this quarreling of the aristocracy, the moneyocracy and the millocracy about his amelioration.

Written on June 17, 1853 Reproduced from the New-York First published in the New-York Daily Daily Tribune Tribune, No. 3809, and the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 845, July 1, 1853; reprinted without the last two subsections in the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 617, July 9, 1853

Signed: Karl Marx

[^1]: a The Times, No. 21457, June 17, 1853.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 148-56.— Ed.





**[p. 142]**

Karl Marx

TURKEY AND RUSSIA.— CONNIVANCE OF THE ABERDEEN MINISTRY

WITH RUSSIA.—THE BUDGET.— TAX ON NEWSPAPER SUPPLEMENTS.—

PARLIAMENTARY CORRUPTION113

London, Tuesday, June 21, 1853

In the year 1828, when Russia was permitted to overrun Turkey with war, and to terminate that war by the Treaty of Adrianople, which surrendered to her the whole of the Eastern coast of the Black Sea, from Anapa in the North to Poti in the South (except Circassia), and delivered into her possession the islands at the mouth of the Danube, virtually separated Moldavia and Wallachia from Turkey, and placed them under Russian supremacy—at that epoch Lord Aberdeen happened to be Minister of Foreign Affairs in Great Britain. In 1853 we find the very same Aberdeen as the chief of the "composite ministry" in the same country. This simple fact goes far to explain the overbearing attitude assumed by Russia in her present conflict with Turkey and with Europe.

I told you in my last letter that the storm aroused by the revelations of The Press respecting the secret transactions between Aberdeen, Clarendon and Baron Brunnow,3 was not likely to subside under the hair-splitting, tortuous and disingenuous pleading of Thursday's6 Times. The Times was even then forced to admit in a semi-official article, that Lord Clarendon had indeed given his assent to the demands about to be made by Russia on the Porte, but said that the demands as represented in London, and those actually proposed at Constantinople, had turned out to be of quite a different tenor, although the papers communicated by Baron Brunnow to the British Minister purported to be "literal extracts" from the instructions forwarded to Prince Menchikoff. On

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 137-38.— Ed. b June 16, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 143]**

It is stated that a communication was made to Lord Clarendon, wherein he was informed that the affair of the Shrines was not the sole object of the Russian Prince.0 In that communication the general question was entered into, the question of the Greek Christians of Turkey, and of the position of the Emperor of Russia with respect to them under certain treaties. All these points were canvassed, and the course about to be adopted by Russia explicitly stated—the same as detailed in the projected convention of the 6th of May.114 Lord Clarendon, with the assent of Lord Aberdeen, in no wise either disapproved or discouraged that course. While matters stood thus in London, Bonaparte sent his fleet to Salamis, public opinion pressed from without, Ministers were interpellated in both Houses, Russell pledged himself to the maintenance of the integrity and independence of Turkey, and Prince Menchikoff threw off the mask at Constantinople. It now became necessary for Lords Aberdeen and Clarendon to initiate the other Ministers in what had been done, and the Coalition was on the eve of being broken up, as Lord Palmerston, forced by his antecedents, urged a directly opposite line of policy. In order to prevent the dissolution of his Cabinet, Lord Aberdeen finally yielded to Lord Palmerston, and consented to the combined action of the English and French fleets in the Dardanelles. But at the same time, in order to fulfill his engagements toward Russia, Lord Aberdeen intimated through a private dispatch to St. Petersburg

[^1]: Clauses of the Balta-Liman Convention and the Times commentaries to them are quoted from Issue No. 21458, June 18, 1853.— Ed.

[^2]: b The Morning Herald, No. 22189, June 20, 1853.— Ed. A. S. Menshikov.— Ed.





**[p. 144]**

" 1 . That the occupation of those provinces, if it occurs, shall only be by a joint one of Russian and Turkish forces.

"2. That the sole plea for it shall be in grave events taking place in the principalities."

Now as no events at all have taken place in those Principalities, and moreover, as Russia has no intention to enter them in common with the Turks, but precisely against Turkey, The Times is of opinion, that Turkey ought to suffer quietly the occupation by Russia alone, and afterward enter into negotiations with her. But if Turkey should be of a less sedate temper and consider the occupation as a casus belli, The Times argues that England and France must not do so; and if, nevertheless, England [and] France should do so, The Times recommends that it should be done in a gentle manner, by no means as belligerents against Russia, but only as defensive allies of Turkey.

This cowardly and tortuous system of The Times, I cannot more appropriately stigmatise than by quoting the following passage from its leading article of to-day. It is an incredible combination of all the contradictions, subterfuges, false pretences, anxieties and lâchetés3 of Lord Aberdeen's policy:

[^1]: "Before proceeding to the last extremities the Porte may, if it think fit, protest against the occupation of the principalities, and with the support of all the Powers of Europe, may still negotiate. It will remain with the Turkish government, acting in concert with the ambassadors of the four Powers, to determine this momentous point, and especially to decide whether the state of hostilities is such as to cause the

[^2]: a Baseness.— Ed.





**[p. 145]**

All the leaders of The Times have been to no purpose. No other paper would follow in its track—none would bite at its bait, and even the Ministerial papers, The Morning Chronicle, Morning Post, Globe, and Observer take an entirely different stand, finding a loud echo on the other side of the channel, where only the legitimist

Assemblée nationale presumes to see no casus belli in the occupation of the Danubian Principalities.

The dissension in the camp of the Coalition Ministry has thus been betrayed to the public by the clamorous dissension in their organs. Palmerston urged upon the Cabinet to hold the occupa- tion of Moldavia and Wallachia as a declaration of war, and he was backed up by the Whig and Sham-Radical members of the composite ministry. Lord Aberdeen, having only consented to the common action of the French and English fleets upon the understanding that Russia would not act at the Dardanelles but in the Danubian Provinces, was now quite "outwinded." The existence of the Government was again at stake. At last, at the pressing instances of Lord Aberdeen, Palmerston was prepared to give a sullen assent to the unchallenged occupation of the Principalities by Russia, when suddenly a dispatch arrived from Paris announcing that Bonaparte had resolved to view the same act as a casus belli. The confusion has now reached its highest point.

Now, if this statement be correct, and from our knowledge of Lord Aberdeen's past, there is every reason to consider it as such—the whole mystery of that Russo-Turkish tragi-comedy that has occupied Europe for months together, is laid bare. We understand at once, why Lord Aberdeen would not move the British fleet from Malta. We understand the rebuke given to Colonel Rose for his resolute conduct at Constantinople,118 the bullying behavior of Prince Menchikoff, and the heroic firmness of the Czar who, conceiving the warlike movements of England as a mere farce, would have been glad to be allowed, by the uncontroverted occupation of Moldavia and Wallachia, not only to withdraw from the stage as the "master," but to hold his annual



**[p. 146]**

"The coalition is shaking at every breeze that flows from the Dardanelles. The fears of the good Aberdeen and the miserable incompetence of Clarendon, encouraged Russia, and have produced the crisis."

The latest news from Turkey is as follows: The Turkish Ambassador at Paris has received by telegraph, via Semlin, a dispatch from Constantinople, informing him that the Porte has rejected the last ultimatum of Russia,119 taking its stand on the memorandum forwarded to the Great Powers. The Sémaphore, of Marseilles, states that news had been received at Smyrna of the capture of two Turkish trading vessels on the Black Sea by the Russians; but that, on the other hand, the Caucasian tribes had opened a general campaign against the Russians, in which Shamyl had achieved a most brilliant victory, taking no less than 23 cannons.

Mr. Gladstone has now announced his altered proposals, with regard to the Advertisement Duty. He had proposed, in order to secure the support of The Times, to strike the duty off supplements containing advertisements only. He now proposes, intimidated by public opinion, to let all single supplements go free, and to tax each double supplement V2d. Imagine the fury of The Times, which, by this altered proposition, will only gain £20,000, instead of £40,000 a year, besides seeing the market thrown open to its competitors. This consistent journal which defends to the utmost the taxes upon knowledge, and the duty on advertise- ments, now opposes any tax on supplements. But it may console itself. If the Ministry, after having carried the greater part of the budget, feel no longer any necessity for cajoling The Times, the Manchester men, as soon as they have secured their share of the budget, will no longer want the Ministry. This is what the latter apprehend, and that very apprehension accounts for the fact of the budget discussion extending over the whole period of the session. It is characteristic of the compensating justice of Mr. Gladstone, that while he reduces the newspaper advertisement

[^1]: The pen-name of A.Richards.— Ed.





**[p. 147]**

To-night the House of Commons will be occupied on two cases of bribery. During the present session 47 Election-Committees have been sitting, out of which, 4 are yet sitting, 43 having concluded their investigations, by finding the majority of the unseated members guilty of bribery. To show the respect in which this Parliament, the offspring of corruption and the parent of Coalitions, is held by public opinion, it is sufficient to quote the following words of to-day's Morning Herald:

"If want of clear aim and object, and still more, the tottering and quavering attack, be symptomatic of imbecility, then it must be confessed that this Parliament, the child of six months, has fallen already into second childishness. [] It is already subsiding and curdling away into small knots of spiritless and purposeless coteries."

Written on June 21, 1853 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3814 and the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 847, July 8, 1853

Signed: Karl Marx



**[p. 148]**

Karl M a r x

THE EAST INDIA COMPANY- ITS HISTORY AND RESULTS

London, Friday, June 24,a 1853

The debate on Lord Stanley's motion to postpone legislation for India, has been deferred until this evening. For the first time since 1783 the India question has become a ministerial one in England. Why is this?

The true commencement of the East India Company cannot be dated from a more remote epoch than the year 1702, when the different societies, claiming the monopoly of the East India trade, united together in one single Company. Till then the very existence of the original East India Company was repeatedly endangered, once suspended for years under the protectorate of Cromwell, and once threatened with utter dissolution by Par- liamentary interference under the reign of William III. It was under the ascendancy of that Dutch Prince when the Whigs became the farmers of the revenues of the British Empire, when the Bank of England 12° sprung into life, when the protective system was firmly established in England, and the balance of power in Europe was definitively settled, that the existence of an East India Company was recognized by Parliament. That era of apparent liberty was in reality the era of monopolies not created by Royal grants, as in the times of Elizabeth and Charles I, but authorized and nationalized by the sanction of Parliament. This epoch in the history of England bears, in fact, an extreme likeness to the epoch of Louis Philippe in France, the old landed

[^1]: The New-York Daily Tribune gave an erroneous dateline: "Saturday, June 21" (June 21 was a Tuesday). Here it is corrected according to Marx's notebook, in which mailing of the article is dated June 24.— Ed.





**[p. 149]**

The union between the Constitutional Monarchy and the monopolizing monied interest, between the Company of East India and the "glorious" revolution of 1688 121 was fostered by the same force by which the liberal interests and a liberal dynasty have at all times and in all countries met and combined, by the force of corruption, that first and last moving power of Constitutional Monarchy, the guardian angel of William III and the fatal demon of Louis Philippe. So early as 1693, it appeared from Parliamen- tary inquiries, that the annual expenditure of the East India Company, under the head of "gifts" to men in power, which had rarely amounted to above £1,200 before the revolution, reached the sum of £90,000. The Duke of Leeds was impeached for a bribe of £5,000, and the virtuous King himself convicted of having received £10,000. Besides these direct briberies, rival Companies were thrown out by tempting Government with loans of enormous sums at the lowest interest, and by buying off rival Directors.

The power the East India Company had obtained by bribing the Government, as did also the Bank of England, it was forced to maintain by bribing again, as did the Bank of England. At every epoch when its monopoly was expiring, it could only effect a renewal of its Charter by offering fresh loans and by fresh presents made to the Government.

The events of the Seven-Years-War transformed the East India Company from a commercial into a military and territorial power.122 It was then that the foundation was laid of the present British Empire in the East. Then East India stock rose to £263, and dividends were then paid at the rate of 12'/2 per cent. But then there appeared a new enemy to the Company, no longer in the shape of rival societies, but in the shape of rival ministers and of a rival people. It was alleged that the Company's territory had been conquered by the aid of British fleets and British armies, and that no British subjects could hold territorial sovereignties



**[p. 150]**

But the East India Company, instead of fulfilling its agreement, got into financial difficulties, and, instead of paying a tribute to the English people, appealed to Parliament for pecuniary aid. Serious alterations in the Charter were the consequence of this step. The Company's affairs failing to improve, notwithstanding their new condition, and the English nation having simultaneously lost their colonies in North America, the necessity of elsewhere regaining some great Colonial Empire became more and more universally felt. The illustrious Fox thought the opportune moment had arrived, in 1783, for bringing forward his famous India bill, which proposed to abolish the Courts of Directors and Proprietors, and to vest the whole Indian government in the hands of seven Commissioners appointed by Parliament. By the personal influence of the imbecile King3 over the House of Lords, the bill of Mr. Fox was defeated, and made ' the instrument of breaking down the then Coalition Government of Fox and Lord North, and of placing the famous Pitt at the head of the Government. Pitt carried in 1784 a bill through both Houses, which directed the establishment of the Board of Control, consisting of six members of the Privy Council, who were

[^1]: "to check, superintend and control all acts, operations and concerns which in any wise related to the civil and military Government, or revenues of the territories and possessions of the East India Company."

[^2]: On this head, Mill, the historian, saysb:

[^3]: "In passing that law two objects were pursued. To avoid the imputation of what was represented as the heinous object of Mr. Fox's bill, it was necessary, that the principal part of the power should appear to remain in the hand of the Directors. For ministerial advantage it was necessary that it should in reality be all taken away. Mr. Pitt's bill professed to differ from that of his rival, chiefly in this very point, that while the one destroyed the power of the Directors, the other left it almost entire. Under the act of Mr. Fox the powers of the ministers would have been avowedly held. Under the act of Mr. Pitt, they were held in secret and by fraud. The bill of Fox transferred the powers of the Company to Commissioners appointed by Parliament. The bill of Mr. Pitt transferred them to Commissioners appointed by the King."

[^4]: George III.— Ed. J. Mill, The History of the British India; the passage above is also quoted from this book.— Ed.





**[p. 151]**

This, then, is the first reason of the India question's having failed to become a great political question, since and before 1784; that before that time the East India Company had first to conquer existence and importance; that after that time the Oligarchy absorbed all of its power which it could assume without incur- ring responsibility; and that afterwards the English people in general were at the very epochs of the renewal of the Charter, in 1813 and 1833, absorbed by other questions of overbearing interest.

We will now take a different view. The East India Company commenced by attempting merely to establish factories for their agents, and places of deposit for their goods. In order to protect them they erected several forts. Although they had, even as early as 1689, conceived the establishment of a dominion in India, and of making territorial revenue one of their sources of emolument, yet, down to 1744, they had acquired but a few unimportant districts around Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta. The war which subsequently broke out in the Carnatic had the effect of rendering them after various struggles, virtual sovereigns of that part of India. Much more considerable results arose from the war in Bengal and the victories of Clive. These results were the real occupation of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa.124 At the end of the Eighteenth Century, and in the first years of the present one, there supervened the wars with Tippoo Saib, and in consequence of them a great advance of power, and an immense extension of the subsidiary system.125 In the second decennium of the Nineteenth Century the first convenient frontier, that of India within the desert, had at length been conquered. It was not till then that the British Empire in the East reached those parts of Asia, which had been, at all times, the seat of every great central power in India. But the most vulnerable point of the Empire, from which it had been overrun as often as old conquerors were expelled by new ones, the barriers of the Western frontier, were not in the hands of the British. During the period from 1838 to 1849, in the Sikh and Afghan wars, British rule subjected to definitive possession the ethnographical, political, and military



**[p. 152]**

suzeraineté under various forms, and cut off from the sea-coast, with the sole exception of Guzerat and Scinde. As to its exterior, India was now finished. It is only since 1849, that the one great Anglo-Indian Empire has existed.

Thus the British Government has been fighting, under the Company's name, for two centuries, till at last the natural limits of India were reached. We understand now, why during ail this time all parties in England have connived in silence, even those which had resolved to become the loudest with their hypocritical peace-cant, after the arrondissement of the one Indian Empire should have been completed. Firstly, of course, they had to get it, in order to subject it afterward to their sharp philanthropy. From this view we understand the altered position of the Indian question in the present year, 1853, compared with all former periods of Charter renewal.

Again, let us take a different view. We shall still better understand the peculiar crisis in Indian legislation, on reviewing the course of British commercial intercourse with India through its different phases.

At the commencement of the East India Company's operations, under the reign of Elizabeth, the Company was permitted for the purpose of profitably carrying on its trade with India, to export an annual value of £30,000 in silver, gold, and foreign coin. This was an infraction against all the prejudices of the age, and Thomas Mun was forced to lay down in A Discourse on Trade from England to the East Indies, the foundation of the "mercantile system," admitting that the precious metals were the only real wealth a country could possess, but contending at the same time that their exportation might be safely allowed, provided the balance of payments was in favor of the exporting nation. In this sense, he contended that the commodities imported from East India were chiefly re-exported to other countries, from which a much greater quantity of bullion was obtained than had been required to pay for them in India. In the same spirit, Sir Josiah Child wrote A Treatise Wherein It Is Demonstrated That the East India Trade Is the



**[p. 153]**

Parliamentary intervention, with regard to the East India Company, was again claimed, not by the commercial, but by the industrial class, at the latter end of the 17th century, and during the greater part of the 18th, when the importation of East Indian cotton and silk stuffs was declared to ruin the poor British manufacturers, an opinion put forward in John Pollexfen: England and India Inconsistent in Their Manufactures, London, 1697,127 a title strangely verified a century and a half later, but in a very different sense. Parliament did then interfere. By the Act 11 and 12 William III, cap. 10, it was enacted that the wearing of wrought silks and of printed or dyed calicoes from India, Persia and China should be prohibited, and a penalty of £200 imposed on all persons having or selling the same. Similar laws were enacted under George I, II and III, in consequence of the repeated lamentations of the afterward so "enlightened" British manufacturers. And thus, during the greater part of the 18th century, Indian manufactures were generally imported into England in order to be sold on the Continent, and to remain excluded from the English market itself.

Besides this Parliamentary interference with East India, solicited by the greedy home manufacturer, efforts were made at every epoch of the renewal of the Charter, by the merchants of London, Liverpool and Bristol, to break down the commercial monopoly of the Company, and to participate in that commerce, estimated to be a true mine of gold. In consequence of these efforts, a provision was made in the Act of 1773 prolonging the Company's Charter till March 1, 1814, by which private British individuals were authorized to export from, and the Company's Indian servants permitted to import into England, almost all sorts of commodities. But this concession was surrounded with conditions annihilating its effects, in respect to the exports to British India by private merchants. In 1813 the Company was unable to further withstand the pressure of general commerce, and except the monopoly of the Chinese trade, the trade to India was opened, under certain conditions, to private competition. At the renewal of the Charter in 1833, these last restrictions were at length superseded, the Company forbidden to carry on any trade at all—their commer- cial character destroyed, and their privilege of excluding British subjects from the Indian territories withdrawn.



**[p. 154]**

Till then the interests of the moneyocracy which had converted India into its landed estates, of the oligarchy who had conquered it by their armies, and of the millocracy who had inundated it with their fabrics, had gone hand in hand. But the more the industrial interest became dependent on the Indian market, the more it felt the necessity of creating fresh productive powers in India, after having ruined her native industry. You cannot continue to



**[p. 155]**

And now to the fourth and last point of view, from which the Indian question must be judged. Since 1784 Indian finances have got more and more deeply into difficulty. There exists now a national debt of 50 million pounds, a continual decrease in the resources of the revenue, and a corresponding increase in the expenditure, dubiously balanced by the gambling income of the opium tax, now threatened with extinction by the Chinese beginning themselves to cultivate the poppy, and aggra- vated by the expenses to be anticipated from the senseless Bur- mese war.128

[^1]: "As the case stands," says Mr. Dickinson, "as it would ruin England to lose her Empire in India, it is threatening our own finances with ruin, to be obliged to keep it."a

[^2]: a J.Dickinson, The Government of India under a Bureaucracy, p. 50.— Ed.





**[p. 156]**

Written on June 24, 1853 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3816, July 11. 1853; re- printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 848, July 12, 1853

Signed: Karl Marx



**[p. 157]**

Karl Marx

THE INDIAN QUESTION.—IRISH TENANT RIGHT

London, June 28, 1853

The debate on Lord Stanley's motion with respect to India commenced on the 23d, continued on the 24th, and adjourned to the 27th inst., has not been brought to a close. When that shall at length have arrived, I intend to resume my observations on the India question.

As the Coalition Ministry depends on the support of the Irish party, and ai all the other parties composing the House of Commons so nicely balance each other that the Irish may at any moment turn the scales which way they please, some concessions are at last about to be made to the Irish tenants. The "Leasing Powers (Ireland) Bill," which passed the House of Commons on Friday last, contains a provision that for the improvements made on the soil and separable from the soil, the tenant shall have at the termination of his lease, a compensation in money, the incoming tenant being at liberty to take them at the valuation, while with respect to improvements in the soil, compensation for them shall be arranged by contract between the landlord and the tenant.129

A tenant having incorporated his capital, in one form or another, in the land, and having thus effected an improvement of the soil, either directly by irrigation, drainage, manure, or indirectly by construction of buildings for agricultural purposes, in steps the landlord with demand for increased rent. If the tenant concede, he has to pay the interest for his own money to the landlord. If he resist, he will be very unceremoniously ejected, and supplanted by a new tenant, the latter being enabled to pay a higher rent by the very expenses incurred by his predecessors, until he also, in his turn, has become an improver of the land, and



**[p. 158]**

"There are two general systems of farm occupation. Either a tenant may take a lease of the land for a fixed number of years, or his holding may be terminable at any time upon certain notice. In the first of these events, it would be obviously his course to adjust and apportion his outlay so that all, or nearly all, the benefit would find its way to him before the expiration of his term. In the second case it seems equally obvious that he should not run the risk of the investment without a proper assurance of return." 3

Where the landlords have to deal with a class of large capitalists who may, as they please, invest their stock in commerce, in manufactures or in farming, there can be no doubt but that these capitalist farmers, whether they take long leases or no time leases at all, know how to secure the "proper" return of their outlays. But with regard to Ireland the supposition is quite fictitious. On the one side you have there a small class of land monopolists, on the other, a very large class of tenants with very petty fortunes, which they have no chance to invest in different ways, no other field of production opening to them, except the soil. They are, therefore, forced to become tenants-at-will.130 Being once tenants-at-will, they naturally run the risk of losing their revenue, provided they do not invest their small capital. Investing it, in order to secure their revenue, they run the risk of losing their capital, also.

[^1]: "Perhaps," continues The Times, "it may be said, that in any case a tenantry could hardly expire without something being left upon the ground, in some shape

[^2]: a The Times, No. 21464, June 25, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. 159]**

Indeed, under "proper conditions of society," we should want no more Parliamentary interference with the Irish land-tenant, as we should not want, under "proper conditions of society," the interference of the soldier, of the policeman, and of the hangman. Legislature, magistracy, and armed force, are all of them but the offspring of improper conditions of society, preventing those arrangements among men which would make useless the compul- sory intervention of a third supreme power. Has, perhaps, The Times been converted into a social revolutionist? Does it want a social revolution, reorganizing the "conditions of society," and the "arrangements" emanating from them, instead of "Parliamentary enactments?" England has subverted the conditions of Irish society. At first it confiscated the land, then it suppressed the industry by "Parliamentary enactments,"131 and lastly, it broke the active energy by armed force. And thus England created those abominable "conditions of society" which enable a small caste of rapacious lordlings to dictate to the Irish people the terms on which they shall be allowed to hold the land and to live upon it. Too weak yet for revolutionizing those "social conditions," the people appeal to Parliament, demanding at least their mitigation and regulation. But "No," says The Times; if you don't live under proper conditions of society, Parliament can't mend that. And if the Irish people, on the advice of The Times, tried to-morrow to mend their conditions of society, The Times would be the first to appeal to bayonets, and to pour out sanguinary denunciations of "the aboriginal faults of the Celtic race," wanting the Anglo-Saxon taste for pacific progress and legal amelioration.

The case stands rather differently in Ireland. The more a landlord injures one tenant, the easier he will find it to oppress another. The tenant who comes in, is the means of injuring the ejected one, and the ejected one is the means of keeping down the new occupant. That, in due course of time, the landlord, beside

[^1]: "If a landlord," says The Times, "deliberately injures one tenant, he will find it so much the harder to get another, and whereas his occupation consists in letting land, he will find his land all the more difficult to let."





**[p. 160]**

"The relations between the landlord and tenant are those between two traders," says The Times.

This is precisely the petitio principii which pervades the whole leader of The Times. The needy Irish tenant belongs to the soil, while the soil belongs to the English Lord. As well you might call the relation between the robber who presents his pistol, and the traveler who presents his purse, a relation between two traders.

"But," says The Times, "in point of fact, the relation between Irish landlords and tenants will soon be reformed by an agency more potent than that of legislation. [] The property of Ireland is fast passing into new hands, and, if the present rate of emigration continues, its cultivation must undergo the same transfer."

Here, at least, The Times has the truth. British Parliament does not interfere at a moment when the worked-out old system is terminating in the common ruin, both of the thrifty landlord and the needy tenant, the former being knocked down by the hammer of the Encumbered Estates Commission, and the latter expelled by compulsory emigration. This reminds us of the old Sultan of Morocco. Whenever there was a case pending between two parties, he knew of no more "potent agency" for settling their controversy, than by killing both parties.

The Times seems to have been the sleeping Epimenides of the past half century, and never to have heard of the hot controversy going on during all that time upon the claims of the landlord, not among social reformers and Communists, but among the very political economists of the British middle-class. Ricardo, the creator of modern political economy in Great Britain, did not controvert the "right" of the landlords, as he was quite convinced that their claims were based upon fact, and not on right, and that political economy in general had nothing to do with questions of right; but he attacked the land-monopoly in a more unassuming, yet more scientific, and therefore more dangerous manner. He proved that private proprietorship in land, as distinguished from the respective claims of the laborer, and of the farmer, was a

[^1]: "Nothing could tend," concludes The Times with regard to Tenant Right, "to greater confusion than such a communistic distribution of ownership. [] The only person with any right in the land, is the landlord."





**[p. 161]**

The London Economist, whose chief editor, Mr. J. Wilson, is not only a Free Trade oracle, but a Whig one, too, and not only a Whig, but also an inevitable Treasury-appendage in every Whig or composite ministry, has contended in different articles that exactly speaking there can exist no title authorizing any individual, or any number of individuals, to claim the exclusive proprietorship in the soil of a nation.

Mr. Newman, in his Lectures on Political Economy, London, 1851, professedly written for the purpose of refuting Socialism, tells us:

"No man has, or can have, a natural right to land, except so long as he occupies it in person. His right is to the use, and to the use only. All other right is the creation of artificial law (or parliamentary enactments as The Times would call it) If, at any time, land becomes needed to live upon, the right of private possessors to withhold it comes to an end." [Pp. 137, 141.]

This is exactly the case in Ireland, and Mr. Newman expressly confirms the claims of the Irish tenantry, and in lectures held before the most select audiences of the British aristocracy.

In conclusion let me quote some passages from Mr. Herbert Spencer's work, Social Statics, London, 1851, also, purporting to be a complete refutation of Communism, and acknowledged as the most elaborate development of the Free Trade doctrines of modern England.

[^1]: "No one [] may use the earth in such a way as to prevent the rest from similarly using it. [] Equity, therefore, does not permit property in land, or the rest would live on the earth by sufferance only. The landless men might equitably be expelled from the earth altogether It can never be pretended, that the existing titles to such property are legitimate. Should any one think so let him look in the Chronicles. [] The original deeds were written with the sword, rather than with the pen. Not lawyers but soldiers were the conveyancers: blows were the current coin given in payment; and for seals blood was used in preference to wax. Could valid claims be thus constituted? Hardly. And if not, what becomes of the pretensions of all subsequent holders of estates so obtained? Does sale or bequest generate a right where it did not previously exist? If one act of transfer can give no title, can many? At what rate per annum do invalid claims become valid? The right of mankind at large to the earth's surface is still valid, all deeds, customs

[^2]: 7-TM6





**[p. 162]**

Thus, from the very point of view of modern English political economists, it is not the usurping English landlord, but the Irish tenants and laborers, who have the only right in the soil of their native country, and The Times, in opposing the demands of the Irish people, places itself into direct antagonism to British middle-class science.

Written on June 28, 1853 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3816, July 11, 1853; re- printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 848, July 12, 1853

[^1]: Signed: Karl Marx



