---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "22. K. Marx. The British Rule in India "
Page_Range: "156-165"
---

# 22. K. Marx. The British Rule in India 



**[p. 125]**

Karl Marx

THE BRITISH RULE IN INDIA'

London, Friday, June 10, 1853

Telegraphic dispatches from Vienna announce that the pacific solution of the Turkish, Sardinian and Swiss questions, is regarded there as a certainty.

Last night the debate on India was continued in the House of Commons, in the usual dull manner. Mr. Blackett charged the statements of Sir Charles Wood and Sir J. Hogg with bearing the stamp of optimist falsehood. A lot of Ministerial and Directorial advocates rebuked the charge as well as they could, and the inevitable Mr. Hume summed up by calling on Ministers to withdraw their bill. Debate adjourned.

Hindostan is an Italy of Asiatic dimensions, the Himalayas for the Alps, the Plains of Bengal for the Plains of Lombardy, the Deccan for the Apennines, and the Isle of Ceylon for the Island of Sicily. The same rich variety in the products of the soil, and the same dismemberment in the political configuration. Just as Italy has, from time to time, been compressed by the conqueror's sword into different national masses, so do we find Hindostan, when not under the pressure of the Mohammedan, or the Mogul,104 or the Briton, dissolved into as many independent and conflicting States as it numbered towns, or even villages. Yet, in a social point of view, Hindostan is not the Italy, but the Ireland of the East. And this strange combination of Italy and of Ireland, of a world of voluptuousness and of a world of woes, is anticipated in the ancient traditions of the religion of Hindostan. That religion is at once a religion of sensualist exuberance, and a religion of



**[p. 126]**

I share not the opinion of those who believe in a golden age of Hindostan, without recurring, however, like Sir Charles Wood, for the confirmation of my view, to the authority of Khuli-Khan.a But take, for example, the times of Aurangzeb; or the epoch, when the Mogul appeared in the North, and the Portuguese in the South; or the age of Mohammedan invasion, and of the Hep- tarchy in Southern India106; or, if you will, go still more back to antiquity, take the mythological chronology of the Brahman himself, who places the commencement of Indian misery in an epoch even more remote than the Christian creation of the world.

There cannot, however, remain any doubt but that the misery inflicted by the British on Hindostan is of an essentially different and infinitely more intensive kind than all Hindostan had to suffer before. I do not allude to European despotism, planted upon Asiatic despotism, by the British East India Company, forming a more monstrous combination than any of the divine monsters startling us in the Temple of Salsette.107 This is no distinctive feature of British Colonial rule, but only an imitation of the Dutch, and so much so that in order to characterise the working of the British East India Company, it is sufficient to literally repeat what Sir Stamford Raffles, the English Governor of Java, said of the old Dutch East India Company:

All the civil wars, invasions, revolutions, conquests, famines, strangely complex, rapid, and destructive as the successive action in Hindostan may appear, did not go deeper than its surface. England has broken down the entire framework of Indian society, without any symptoms of reconstitution yet appearing. This loss of his old world, with no gain of a new one, imparts a particular kind of melancholy to the present misery of the Hindoo, and separates

[^1]: "The Dutch Company, actuated solely by the spirit of gain, and viewing their [Javan] subjects, with less regard or consideration than a West India planter formerly viewed a gang upon his estate, because the latter had paid the purchase money of human property, which the other had not, employed all the existing machinery of despotism to squeeze from the people their utmost mite of contribution, the last dregs of their labor, and thus aggravated the evils of a capricious and semi-barbarous Government, by working it with all the practised ingenuity of politicians, and all the monopolizing selfishness of traders."

[^2]: See this volume, p. 122.— Ed. Th. S. Raffles, The History of Java, Vol. 1, p. 151.— Ed.





**[p. 127]**

Hindustan, ruled by Britain, from all its ancient traditions, and from the whole of its past history.

There have been in Asia, generally, from immemorial times, but three departments of Government; that of Finance, or the plunder of the interior; that of War, or the plunder of the exterior; and, finally, the department of Public Works. Climate and territorial conditions, especially the vast tracts of desert, extending from the Sahara, through Arabia, Persia, India, and Tartary, to the most elevated Asiatic highlands, constituted artificial irrigation by canals and water-works the basis of Oriental agriculture. As in Egypt and India, inundations are used for fertilizing the soil in Mesopotamia, Persia, &c; advantage is taken of a high level for feeding irrigative canals. This prime necessity of an economical and common use of water, which, in the Occident, drove private enterprise to voluntary association, as in Flanders and Italy, necessitated, in the Orient where civilization was too low and the territorial extent too vast to call into life voluntary association, the interference of the centralizing power of Government. Hence an economical function devolved upon all Asiatic Governments, the function of providing public works. This artificial fertilization of the soil, dependent on a Central Government, and immediately decaying with the neglect of irrigation and drainage, explains the otherwise strange fact that we now find whole territories barren and desert that were once brilliantly cultivated, as Palmyra, Petra, the ruins in Yemen, and large provinces of Egypt, Persia, and Hindustan; it also explains how a single war of devastation has been able to de- populate a country for centuries, and to strip it of all its civi- lization.

Now, the British in East India accepted from their predecessors the department of finance and of war, but they have neglected entirely that of public works. Hence the deterioration of an agriculture which is not capable of being conducted on the British principle of free competition, of laissez-faire and laissez-aller? But in Asiatic empires we are quite accustomed to see agriculture deteriorating under one government and reviving again under some other government. There the harvests correspond to good or bad government, as they change in Europe with good or bad seasons. Thus the oppression and neglect of agriculture, bad as it is, could not be looked upon as the final blow dealt to Indian

[^1]: a Laissez-faire, laissez-aller was the formula of the advocates of free trade and non-intervention of the state in economic relations.— Ed.





**[p. 128]**

These two circumstances—the Hindoo, on the one hand, leaving, like all Oriental peoples, to the Central Government the care of the great public works, the prime condition of his agriculture and commerce, dispersed, on the other hand, over the surface of the country, and agglomerated in small centers by the domestic union of agricultural and manufacturing pursuits—these two circumstances had brought about, since the remotest times, a social system of particular features—the so-called village system, which gave to each of these small unions their independent organization and distinct life. The peculiar character of this system may be judged from the following description, contained in an old official report of the British House of Commons on Indian affairs:

The Britfoli Rale In lasllat.

_ _ . tiday. June 10, IS5S. Telegraphic dispatches from Vinuua announce that the pacific solution of the Turkish, Sardinian and Swiss questions, if« regarded there as a certainty.

Lnst flight the debate on India was continued in the House of Commons, in the usual dull manner. Mr. Blaekett charged tho statements of Sir Charles Wood and Sir J . Hogg with bearing the stamp of optimise falsehood. A lot of Ministerial and Directorial advo- cates rebuked the charge aa well as they could, and the ineviiable Mr. Hume summed up by calling OQ Ministers to withdraw their bill. Debate adjourned. iliixlowtnu is an Italy of Asiatic dimensions, the Himalayas (or the Alps tho Pia ins of Bengal for the Plsins of Lomhardv, thw Deccan for the Appenines, «id the Isle of Ceylon for the Island of Sicily. The name rich variety in the products of the soil, and tho name dismemberment in the political configuration. Just its Italy lias, from time to time, been compressed by the conqueror's sword into different national masses, so du we lind Hindost an, when not under the pressure of tbe Mohammedan or the Mogul, or the Briton, dis- solved into as many independent and conflicting States as it numhercd towns, er even villages. Yet, in a social point of view, Hindostan is wot the Italy, but the Ire- land of the East And this strange combination of Italy and of Ireland,ofa world of voluptuousness and of a world of wees, is anticipated in the ancient traditions of the religion of Ifindostan. That religion is at once a religion of sensualist exuberance, and a religion of solf- torturin^ascetism;A religion of the Lingam and of the Juggernaut; the religion of the Monk, and of the Baya- dere.

I nbtire not the opinion of those who bolievo in a golden age of Hindnstan, without recurring, however, like Sir Charles Wood, for the confirmation of my view, to the authority of Khuli-Khan. But take, for example, the times of Aumng-Zebc; or the epoch, when the Mogul ttppcaredin the North, and the Portuguese in the South; or the nge of Mohammedan invasion, ami of the Heptarchy in Southern India; or, if you will, go still more back to nn Uquity.takc the mythological chronology of the Bruhnjito himself, who places the commencement of Indian miser)' in an epoch even more remote thau the Christian csenrion of the world.

injured,

families have continued for ages. The inhabitant* themselves no trouhl^ about the hre:>kin^ up and <1IVI of kingdoms; while tlm village remain* entire, the not to what power it is transferred, or to what sover devolves; itn internal economy remain"« unchanged porail is still th« hem! inhabitant, and still acts an the petty •*?.;.

udge or magistrate, and collector or rent or of the vil- la««."

These small stereotype forms of social organism hive been to the greater part dissolved, nnd are disappearing, not so much through the brutal interference of the Brit- ish tax-gatherer and the It rit lob. soldier, as to the working of English steam and English free trade. Those family-communities wero based on domestic in- dustry, in that peculiar combination of hand-weaving, hand-spinning and hand-titling agriculture which gave them self-supporting power. English interference hav- ing placed the spinner in Lancashire and the weaver in Bengal, or sweeping away both Hindoo spinner and weaver, dissolved theuc small neini barbaric, semi-civ- ilized communities, by blowing up their economical basis, and thus produced tho greatest, and to speak the truth, the only social revolution ever heard of iu Asia.

Now, sickening as it must be to human feelimr t) wit- ness those myriads nf industrious patriarchal und inof- fensive social organizations disorgtfuized and dissolved into their units, thrown into a sea of woes, and their . individual members login» at the same time their an- cient form of civilization, and their hereditary means of Bubsbtrnce, we muet not forget thn t, these idyllic village- corn munit iea, inoffensive though they may appear, had always been the solid foundation of Oriental despotism, that they restrained tbe human mind within the smallest possible compass, making it the unresisting tool of superstition, enslaving it beneath traditional rule*, depriving it of all grandeur und historical energies. W e must not forget the barbarian egotism which, concentra- ting on sonic miserable patch of land, had q/iietlv wit- nessed the ruin of empires, tbe perpetration of unspeak- able cruelties, the massacre of tho population of largo towns, with no other consideration bestoivcd upon thorn tli HD on natural events, itself the helpless proy of any aggressor who deigned to notice it at al L W e mast not forptt that tliitt undignified, stagnatory, and vegetatire lifii, that this passive sort of existence evoked on the other i«rt, jn contradistinction,vtild, aimless, unbounded forces of destruction and rendered murder itself a reli- gious rite in Hindostan. W e must not forget that these little communities were contaminated by distinctions of caste and by slavery, that they subjugated man to external circumstances instead of elevating miu tbe sovereign of circumstances, that they trans- formed a self-developing social state info never chang- ing natural destiny, and thus brought about a bru- talizing worship of nature, exhibiting its degradation in tbe fact that man, the sovereign of nature, fell down on his knees in adoration of Kann man, the monkey, and Sabbala.tbecow.

[^1]: There cannot, however, remain any doubt but that tbe mi sen* inflicted by the British on Hindostan is of an essentially dureront ami infinitely moro intensive kind ihan all Hindustan had to suffer before. I do not allude to European despotism, planted upon Asiatic despotism, by the British East India Company, forming a more monstrous combination than anv of tbe divine mounters startling us in the Temple of Snlsette. This is a<> dis- tinctive feature of British Colonial rule, but only an imitation of the Dutch, and so much so that in order to characterise the working of the British East India Com- pany, it is sufficient to literally repeat what Sir Stamford Ratlin, the English Governor of Java, said of tbe old Dutch Hast India Company :

[^2]: " The Dutch Company, actuated solely by the spirit of g*»ii>. and viewi Bjr their »abjects, with less regard or coa- »ideration than a West India planter former!* viewed a Kinj upon his estate, because the Jitter had paid the pur chase mor<ev of human property, which the other bad not, employed all tbe existing machinery of despotism to squeeze from the people, their utmost mite of coutribatien, tb« last drvgs of their labor, and thus aggravated tbe evils of a capricious and semi barbarous Government, by work- in** it with all tb« practised iagennitv of politicians, and all the monopolising »)fl-hneas of traders."

[^3]: AH the civil vara, invasions, involutions, conquests, famines, strangely complex, rapid, and destructive aa tbe socceasive*action in Hiniioatan n a y appear, did not go deeper than its surface. England has broken down the entire framework of Indian society, without any symptom« of reconstitution yet appearing. This lots of hi» old world, with no gain of a new one, imparts a par- ticular kind of meiaocboly to tbe pnoeat muery of the Hindoo, and separates Hindoataa, ruled by Britain,from all its ancient traditions, and from the whole of ita past bistory-

[^4]: Tbcro nave been in Asia, generally, from immemorial time», bnt three departments of Government ; that of F Inane*, or the planter of the interior : that of War,

[^5]: England, it is true, in causing a social revolution in Hindostan, was actuated only by tbe vilest interests, and was stupid iu ber manner of enforcing them. But that is not the question. T h e question is. can mankind fulfil its destiny without a fundamental revolution in the social state of Asia? .If not, whatever may have been the crimes of Engla Lo V she was the unconscious tool of his tory in bringing about that révolution.

[^6]: Then, whatever bitterness the spectacle of the crumb- ling of an ancient world may have for our personal feel- ing«, we have the right, in point of history, to exclaim with Goethe:

[^7]: " MU« éiw Qui *na qatlaa Da «e MUH Ltw* vnnakrt. Hat nlcbt myriades 8»*Wn

[^8]: Km. Mux. Tt Mjia H«tmtaft

[^9]: TURKEY AND RUSSIA

[^10]: Part of a page of the New-York Daily Tribune with Marx's article "The British Rule in India"







**[p. 131]**

These small stereotype forms of social organism have been to the greater part dissolved, and are disappearing, not so much through the brutal interference of the British tax-gatherer and the British soldier, as to the working of English steam and English free trade. Those family-communities were based on domestic industry, in that peculiar combination of hand-weaving, hand- spinning and hand-tilling agriculture which gave them self- supporting power. English interference having placed the spinner in Lancashire and the weaver in Bengal, or sweeping away both Hindoo spinner and weaver, dissolved these small semi-barbarian, semi-civilized communities, by blowing up their economical basis,

[^1]: a "Report of the Committee of the House of Commons" published in 1812; quoted from Th. S. Raffles' The History of Java, Vol. 1, p. 285.— Ed.

[^2]: 6*





**[p. 132]**

Now, sickening as it must be to human feeling to witness those myriads of industrious patriarchal and inoffensive social organiza- tions disorganized and dissolved into their units, thrown into a sea of woes, and their individual members losing at the same time their ancient form of civilization, and their hereditary means of subsistence, we must not forget that these idyllic village-communities, inoffensive though they may appear, had always been the solid foundation of Oriental despotism, that they restrained the human mind within the smallest possible compass, making it the unresisting tool of superstition, enslaving it beneath traditional rules, depriving it of all grandeur and historical energies. We must not forget the barbarian egotism which, concentrating on some miserable patch of land, had quietly witnessed the ruin of empires, the perpetration of unspeakable cruelties, the massacre of the population of large towns, with no other consideration bestowed upon them than on natural events, itself the helpless prey of any aggressor who deigned to notice it at all. We must not forget that this undignified, stagnatory, and vegetative life, that this pas- sive sort of existence evoked on the other part, in contradistinc- tion, wild, aimless, unbounded forces of destruction and rendered murder itself a religious rite in Hindostan. We must not forget that these little communities were contaminated by distinctions of caste and by slavery, that they subjugated man to external circumstances instead of elevating man the sovereign of cir- cumstances, that they transformed a self-developing social state into never changing natural destiny, and thus brought about a brutalizing worship of nature, exhibiting its degradation in the fact that man, the sovereign of nature, fell down on his knees in adoration of Kanuman, the monkey, and Sabbala, the cow.

England, it is true, in causing a social revolution in Hindostan, was actuated only by the vilest interests, and was stupid in her manner of enforcing them. But that is not ' the question. The question is, can mankind fulfil its destiny without a fundamental revolution in the social state of Asia? If not, whatever may have been the crimes of England she was the unconscious tool of history in bringing about that revolution.

Then, whatever bitterness the spectacle of the crumbling of an ancient world may have for our personal feelings, we have the right, in point of history, to exclaim with Goethe:



**[p. 133]**

Written on June 10, 1853 Reproduced from the New-York First published in the New-York Daily Dail J Tribune Tribune, No. 3804, June 25, 1853; re- printed in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 844, June 28, and the New- York Weekly Tribune, No. 616, Juif 2, 1853 Signed: Karl Marx

[^1]: "Should this torture then torment us Since it brings us greater pleasure? Were not through the rule of Timur Souls devoured without measure?"

[^2]: From Goethe's "An Suleika", Westöstlicher

[^3]: Diwan.—Ed.



