---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "60. K. Marx. The Labor Question "
Page_Range: "491-495"
---

# 60. K. Marx. The Labor Question 



**[p. 460]**

Karl Marx

THE LABOR QUESTION

London, Friday, Nov. 11, 1853

Golden opportunities, and the use made of them, is the title of one of the most tragi-comical effusions of the grave and profound Economist.* The "golden opportunities" were, of course, afforded by free trade, and the "use" or rather "abuse" made of them refers to the working classes.

"The working classes, for the first time, had their future in their own hands! The population of the United Kingdom began actually to diminish, the emigration carrying off more than its natural increase. How have the workingmen used their opportunity? What have they done? Just what they used to do formerly, on every recurrence of temporary sunshine, married and multiplied as fast as possible. [] At this rate of increase it will not be long before emigration is effectually counterbalanced, and the golden opportunity thrown away."

The golden opportunity of not marrying and not multiplying, except at the orthodox rate allowed by Malthus and his disciples! Golden morality this! But, till now, according to The Economist itself, population has diminished, and has not yet counterbalanced emigration. Overpopulation, then, will not account for the disasters of the times.

The opportunity of becoming capitalists! At the same time The Economist tells the workingmen that, after they had at last obtained ten per cent, on their former earnings, they were able to pocket

[^1]: "The next use the laboring classes should have made of their rare occasion ought to have been to accumulate savings and become capitalists. [] In scarcely one instance do they seem to have [] risen, or begun to rise, into the rank of capitalists. [] They have thrown away their opportunity."

[^2]: The Economist, No. 532, November 5, 1853.—Ed.





**[p. 461]**

Is there anything marvellous in this fact? Brisk trade was synonymous with enlarged factories, with increased application of machinery, with more adult laborers being replaced by women and children, with prolonged hours of work. The more the mill was attended by the mother and the child, the less could the school be frequented. And, after all, of what sort of education would you have given the opportunity to the parents and their children? The opportunity of learning how to keep population at the pace described by Malthus, says The Economist. Education, says

[^1]: "The third use made of the golden opportunity should have been to procure the best possible education for themselves and their children, so as to fit themselves for the improvement in their circumstances, and to learn how to turn it to the best account. Unhappily, we are obliged to state that [] schools have seldom been so ill attended, or school fees so ill paid."





**[p. 462]**

If we sum up then the golden opportunities which have thus been thrown away by the working classes, they consist of the golden opportunity of not marrying, of the opportunity of living less luxuriously, of not asking for higher wages, of becoming capitalists at 15 shillings a week, and of learning how to keep the body together with coarser food, and how to degrade the soul with the pestiferous doctrines of Malthus.

On Friday last Ernest Jones visited the town of Preston to address the factory-hands locked out of the mills, on the labor question. By the appointed time at least 15,000 persons (the Preston Pilot estimates the number at 12,000) had assembled on the ground, and Mr. Jones, on proceeding to the spot, was received with an enthusiastic welcome.3 I give some extracts from his speech:

Mr. George Cowell in very complimentary terms moved, and Mr. John Matthews seconded, a vote of thanks to Ernest Jones for his visit to Preston and the services he was rendering to the cause of labor.

Great exertions had been made on the part of the manufactur- ers to prevent Ernest Jones visiting the town; no hall could be had for the purpose, and bills were accordingly printed in Manchester

[^1]: "Why have these struggles been? Why are they now? Why will they return? Because the fountains of your life are sealed by the hand of Capital, that quaffs its golden goblet to the lees and gives the dregs to you. Why are you locked out of life when you are locked out of the factory? Because you have no other factory to go to—no other means of working for your bread. [] What gives the capitalist this tremendous power? That he holds all the means of employment The means of work is, therefore, the hinge on which the future of the people turns It is a mass movement of all trades, a national movement of the working classes, that can alone achieve a triumphant result Sectionalize and localize your struggle and you may fail—nationalize it and you are sure to win."

[^2]: When describing Jones and other speakers at the meeting in Preston on November 4, 1853, Marx closely followed the article "Immense Demonstration at Preston" published in The People's Paper, No. 80. The quotation from Jones' speech is given according to that article.— Ed.





**[p. 463]**

Written on November 11-12, 1853

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3936, November 28, 1853; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 888, November 29, 1853

Signed: Karl Marx

Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune

