---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "63. K. Marx. David Urquhart "
Page_Range: "508-510"
---

# 63. K. Marx. David Urquhart 



**[p. 477]**

Karl Marx

DAVID URQUHART

In one of the English newspapers to arrive here recently by steamer we discover to our amazement that Mr. D. Urquhart, often mentioned lately as an agitator for the anti-Russian meetings in England, is described as a tool in the service of Russia.* We can only put this absurdity down to intrigues on the part of "free Slavdom", for the whole of Europe has so far known Urquhart only as a dyed-in-the-wool, almost maniacal Russophobe and Turkophile. When he was Secretary to the embassy in Constan- tinople the Russians had even demonstrably tried to poison him. Therefore a few remarks about a man whose name is on everyone's lips but whose actual significance hardly anyone can account for.

Urquhart systematically rides a fixed idea. For 20 years he has been unsuccessfully denouncing Palmerston and the Russian tricks and dodges, and was, therefore, naturally bound to go half-crazy, as would anybody who had a particular idea that was right, but of which he could not convince the world. The fact that Palmerston has been able to hold on until today with his diplomacy, he puts down to the quarrel between the Whigs and Tories, which is partly, but of course only partly, correct. For the English Parliament of today, which judges every issue not on its own merits but solely according to whether a party is "in office" or "out of office", he, who is basically conservative, sees no other salvation but strengthening the royal prerogative, on the one hand, and local, municipal self-government, on the other. To put up a front

[^1]: a The reference is to the article "A Russian Movement in England", in The People's Paper, No. 80, November 12, 1853.— Ed.





**[p. m]**

However, as he has but one cause in life, his campaign against Russia, which he conducts with monomaniacal acumen and a great deal of expert knowledge, none of this does any harm. The knight with one cause in life is bound once more to be "the noble knight of the woeful countenance", nor is there any lack of Sancho Panzas, here or in Europe. A modified example of this species appears in the guise of "A.P.C.",3 the London A-B-C scholar from the Tribune.528

[^1]: "He is an honest, obstinate, truth-loving, enthusiastic, totally illogical old man, tormenting himself with his deep-seated prejudices", as one of his critics says of him.

[^2]: Written about November 20, 1853 Printed according to the news-

[^3]: First published in Die Reform.No. 112, -r i , , r „, ^

[^4]: T-> im»a translated from the German December 19, 1853 „ , , , , . ,. , r Published in English for the first time

[^5]: F. Pulszky.— Ed.



