---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "77. K. Marx. The Czar's Views.- Prince Albert "
Page_Range: "620-624"
---

# 77. K. Marx. The Czar's Views.- Prince Albert 



**[p. 589]**

Karl Marx

[THE CZAR'S VIEWS.—PRINCE ALBERT]3

London, Tuesday, Jan. 24, 1854

The attempts of the Russian army to cross the Danube simultaneously on the whole line of operations—at Matchin, Giurgevo and Kalafat—are to be considered as reconnoitering maneuvers rather than as serious attacks, which can hardly be ventured upon with the present forces Gen. Gorchakoff has to dispose of.

Last Saturday's Press—the Disraeli paper—published a note of a conversation very recently held at Gatchina between the Czar and a "distinguished" Englishman. Almost the whole of the daily London press has reprinted this note, which, besides the known and worn-out commonplaces of Russian diplomacy, contains some interesting statements.

This would only prove that poor John Russell was falsely informed by Baron de Brunnow as to the "probable" intentions of the Sublime Porte, and that the Porte's refusing to yield to the Menchikoff ultimatum at once, was by no means the fault of the Coalition Cabinet. The Czar goes on informing "the individual of distinction" that

Let me remark that Gen. Castelbajac, an old Legitimist and a relative of La Rochejaquelein's, gained his generalship, not by

[^1]: The Czar "distinctly stated that the ultimatum of Menchikoff had not been disapproved of in London, but that the English Ministry, having been informed that it would probably be accepted by the Porte, had recognized it as a satisfactory settlement."

[^2]: "when the news of the victory of Sinope arrived, General Castelbajac" (the French Ambassador) "addressed him a letter beginning something in this way: 'As a Christian and as a soldier, permit me [-••] to congratulate your Imperial Majesty on the glorious victory obtained by vour Majesty's fleet.'"





**[p. 590]**

"He did not believe," the Czar is stated to have said, "that England, with a Bourgeois Parliament, could carry on a war with glory."

There is no doubt that the Czar knows his Cobdens and his Brights, and estimates at its just value the mean and abject spirit of the European middle classes. Finally, the Czar is quite right in stating that, on the one hand, he had not been prepared for war—fully convinced as he was that he should obtain all he cared for by the simple act of bullying—and that, on the other hand, if war were brought about, it would be the "war of incapacities," making it inevitable by their anxious efforts to prevent it, and plunging into it finally in order to cover their blunders and save their places.

I quote the above passage from The Spectator, in order to show your readers how public rumor has been induced by the

[^1]: "Public opinion is half-inclined to sacrifice Prince Albert at the shrine of rumor. A whisper, which was first insinuated for party uses, has grown into a roar, and a constructive hint has swelled into a positive and monstrous fiction. That those who seek the presence of the Queen a should find Prince Albert with her Majesty, is a fact which rather won the sympathy and esteem of the English public; but then it was said that he attended meetings of the Queen with her Ministers; next, that Ministers were made aware of his presence—that, however reluctant to proceed with business before a third party, they found it necessary to do so—that it even became necessary to defend their opinions before the Prince—that the Prince, in fact, interfered with their counsel to their Sovereign—that he not only influenced the Royal mind, but possessing the power of free communication with foreign Courts, he constituted an unlicensed channel for information between the confidential council of the Queen and the Cabinets of foreign potentates, perhaps of the enemies of England—that in short, Prince Albert was a traitor to his Queen, that he had been impeached for high treason, and finally, that on a charge of high treason he had been arrested and committed to the Tower. This was the story not only told in all parts of England a day or two back, but by some believed."

[^2]: Victoria.— Ed.





**[p. 591]**



[^1]: Palmerston.— Ed.





**[p. 592]**

At the annual meeting of the Manchester Commercial Associa- tion the President, Mr. Aspinall Turner, declared with regard to the strikes and lock-outs and the general agitation of the workingmen, which he justly described as "the civil war going on between masters and operatives in Lancashire"—that, "as Man- chester had put down royal tyranny and aristocratic tyranny, so it would also deal with the tyranny of Democracy."3

[^1]: "Here we have," exclaims The Press, "an involuntary avowal of the policy of the Manchester school. The crown is in England supreme—then diminish the royal power. The aristocracy stands before us—sweep it from our path. Workingmen agitate—crush them to the earth."

[^2]: Written on January 24, 1854 Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4000, February 11, 1854; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly

[^3]: Tribune, No. 910, February 14, 1854

[^4]: Signed: Karl Marx

[^5]: '"The Manchester School' and the Strikes", The Press, Vol. I, No. 38, January 21, 1854.__£>/.



