---
Volume: 12
Document_Title: "79. K. Marx. Count Orlov's Mission.- Russian Finances During the War "
Page_Range: "632-637"
---

# 79. K. Marx. Count Orlov's Mission.- Russian Finances During the War 



**[p. 601]**

Karl Marx [COUNT ORLOV'S MISSION.— RUSSIAN FINANCES DURING THE WAR]

London, Friday, Feb. 3, 1854

I was able to see the State procession of the Queen3 to open Parliament, as it passed the Horse Guards. The Turkish Ambas- sador was received with loud cheers and hurrahs. Prince Albert, whose countenance was deadly pale, was furiously hissed by the crowds on both sides of the streets, while the Queen was sparing of her usual salutes and morbidly smiled at the unwonted manifestations of popular discontent. In a previous letter I have reduced the anti-Albert movement to its true dimensions, proving it to be a mere party trick.b The public demonstration is, nevertheless, of a very grave character, as it proves the ostensible loyalty of the British people to be a mere conventional formality, a ceremonious affectation which cannot withstand the slightest shock. Probably it may induce the Crown to dismiss a Ministry, the anti-national policy of which threatens to endanger its own security.

When the recent mission of Count Orloff to the Vienna Cabinet402 became known The Times informed its credulous readers that Orloff was the very man the Czar used to employ on pacific errands/ Now I need not inform you that this same Orloff appeared in the spring of 1833 at Constantinople to squeeze out of the Porte the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi.40a What he now asks from the Cabinet at Vienna is the permission to send a Russian corps from Warsaw, by way of Hungary, to the Danubian seat of

[^1]: Victoria.— Ed. ' See this volume, pp. 589-92.— Ed. ' The Times. No. 21650, January 28, 1854.— Ed.





**[p. 602]**

In a previous letter I called your attention to the recent financial expedient resorted to by the Austrian Government of exacting a discount of. 15 per cent, upon their own paper money, when paid for taxes.3 This ingenious "tax upon the payment of taxes" is now extended to Italy also. The Milan Gazette of the 22d inst. publishes a decree from the Austrian Minister of Finance, announcing that

As to the Russian Exchequer, I had on a previous occasion, at the beginning of what is called the Eastern complication, to warn your readers against the industriously circulated statement of the "hidden" treasures slumbering in the vaults of the Bank of St. Petersburg, and the ridiculous exaggeration of the vast monetary power that Russia can wield at a given moment.5 My views are fully confirmed by what has happened since. Not only has the Czar been forced to withdraw his metallic deposits from the banks of England and France, but, moreover, to commit an act of fraudulent confiscation. Prince Paskiewich has informed the War-

[^1]: "in consequence of the fall in the value of paper money it will not be received at the custom-house unless at a discount of 17 per cent."

[^2]: See this volume, pp. 586-87.—Ed. See this volume, p. 117.—Ed.





**[p. 603]**





**[p. 604]**

One of the European Governments after the other comes forward appealing to the pockets of its beloved subjects. Even the King of sober-minded Holland3 demands of the States General 600,000 rix-dollars for works of fortification and defense, adding "that circumstances may determine him to mobilize a portion of the army and to send out his fleets."

If it were possible to meet real wants and to fill the general vacuum of money chests by any ingenious art of book-keeping, the contriver of the French budget,b as published some days ago in the

Moniteur, would have done the thing; but there is not the smallest shopkeeper at Paris unaware of the fact that, by the most skilful grouping of figures, one cannot get out of the books of his creditor, and that the hero of the 2d of December,0 deeming the public pocket to be inexhaustible, has recklessly run into the nation's debt.

There can be imagined nothing more naif than the announce- ment of the Danish Ministry at the sitting of the Folketing, on the

[^1]: a William III.— Ed.

[^2]: Bineau, "Rapport à l'Empereur", Le Moniteur universel, No. 27, January 27, 1854.— Ed.

[^3]: c Napoleon III.—Ed.





**[p. 605]**

Written on February 3, 1854

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4007, February 20, 1854; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 912, February 21, 1854

Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune

Signed: Karl Marx

