---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "9. Mar x to Engels. 10 April "
Page_Range: "65-69"
---

# 9. Mar x to Engels. 10 April 



**[p. 30]**

Id. to id., 16th July, 1855.

*'If, indeed, Omer Pasha should determine to take any part of his own army, with Tunisians and Albanians to Redoute-Kaleh, Her Majesty's government would have nothing to say to that proceeding, but as regards the contingent under General Vivian and General Beatson's Horse, Her Majesty's government abide by their opinion that they should be directed through Trebizond or Erzeroum.'*

Lord Panmure to General Vivian, 14th July, 1855.

*'I place such full reliance on your professional ability, that I feel no anxiety lest you should undertake any expedition of a nature so wild and ill-digested as that contemplated by the Porte A coup de main by means of suddenly throwing an army on the coast to threaten, or even to attack an enemy's stronghold, is one thing, but a deliberate expedition to invade an enemy's country, and on his own territory to make war upon him, is quite another.'*

I must confess that Clarendon's strategy strikes me as curious in the extreme, as does also the fine distinction drawn by Lord Panmure Carnot favouring the Sevastopol 'coup de main' against the Turkish plan for a strategic move in Georgia.

If possible, then, an answer to these points by return. Salut.

[^1]: Your

[^2]: K. M.

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^4]: 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^5]: 9

[^6]: MARX T O ENGELS 2 0

[^7]: IN MANCHESTER

[^8]: [London,] 10 April 1856

[^9]: DEAR Frederic,

[^10]: It is high time I wrote again. I've been prevented from doing so by all kinds of domesticities.

[^11]: Enclosed 1 letter from Levy to me, from Düsseldorf. T h e T o u r o u t e mentioned in> the letter is a French ex-colonel. H e called





**[p. 31]**

yesterday while I was out and so I shall not be seeing him for several days as he has gone to Liverpool. He had a longish conversation with my wife, the quintessence of which is contained in enclosure 2,sg composed by Madame herself. T h e M. mentioned in Levy's letter is Miquel.

In a few days' time you will receive Igor,22 which has now arrived; Russian-German; the BLUE BOOK3; Destrilhes, Confidences sur la Turquie and a cutting from L'Homme, which I have mislaid and hence cannot send today, viz. a letter from a déporté in Cayenne, Tassilier by name, to M. le Ministre de la Marine, b in which the frightful abominations to which Boustrapa 4 0 subjects the deportees are revealed.41 You would have had the BLUE BOOK long ago but d'abordc the PRESSURE of daily events has several times compelled me to suspend work on my articles'1 on this subject and write about other themes, so that I was unable to do without the book. T h e n the friends whom you know arrived. They wanted to have the NOVELTY just for one day, and had not yet returned it a week later.

As TO THESE KARS PAPERS, The Times, in three fulminating LEADERS,6

gave a rehash of the section covering August 1854 to ABOUT February 1855, i.e. did not so much as touch on the really interesting and crucial period. T h e object of this is, of course, to shift all RESPONSIBILITY from the Ministry onto Redcliffe and the Turkish pashas in Asia. T h e best of it is that the English government, as you will see from Destrilhes, forcibly kept at the helm Redcliffe's rotten Turkish ministry, thus partly condoning and partly bringing about the abominations of which Williams complains. That, however, is only a minor matter. By a procedure similar to the one used in Stieber's case f—namely, by producing proof of FALSIFIED DATES AND FORGED PASSAGES—I have, in my view, proved irrefutably that the responsibility for planning the fall of Kars and for the systematic execution of that plan, lay with the British GOVERNMENT, which furthermore had the good fortune this time to figure in Bonaparte's eyes as zealous 'in the cause'. I have not, OF COURSE, gone into the military aspect proper, i.e. the DEFENCE OF KARS; I have some MISGIVINGS, however, about the 'stature' of Williams.

[^1]: a Papers Relative to Military Affairs in Asiatic Turkey, and the Defence and Capitulation of Kars - b F. A. Hamelin - c first of all - d A series of articles entitled The Fall of Kars which Marx was writing for The People's Paper. It was based on his article of the same tide written for the New-York Daily Tribune. - e 'The Capitulation of Kars',

[^2]: The Times, Nos. 22320, 22322 and 22323, 20, 22 and 24 March 1856. - f Marx refers to his pamphlet Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.

[^3]: 3«





**[p. 32]**

Jones, to whom I have shown my manuscript, intends IF POSSIBLE—i.e. if he can get together enough money to take St. Martin's Hall3—to LECTURE on the FALL OF KARS at the said venue before the debate on it in Parliament begins.

* There is now going on a bitter controversy between the Chartists and the Urquhartites at Newcastle upon Tyne, London, Birmingham, and several other places.*42 As you will have heard, Jones, with Finlen for shadow, has proclaimed himself dictator of Chartism and set up a new organisation which, INDEED, is in process of growing but has, on the other hand, evoked a great storm of indignation against him.43

The 'speculation upon speculation'—not in ideas but in shares— which has invaded the Rhine Province and Berlin from France would appear to be proliferating as viciously there as on the other side of the Rhine. Jeremiads about this social MISCHIEF, this infatuation, are appearing in the Ministry's Preussische Correspon- dent, in which the imminence of an 'inevitable' and general financial crisis is SERIOUSLY AND EMPHATICALLY hinted at.

You will know about Heine's death, but not about Ludwig Simon of Trier pissing—passing water, I mean—on his grave in the New York Neue Zeit run by Löwe, quondam lionb of the Parliament of the 'Cherman' Nation44 after its retreat to Stuckert.c

This poet or minnesinger of the female Yid, Madame Hohenscheisse-esche or-linden of Frankfurt am Main, is naturally of the opinion that Heine was no poet; he had 'no sensibility', was full of 'malevolence' and calumniated not only Kobes I,d but even Berne'se lady friend, the great Berne's 'mouse', muse or moose— the Strauss woman.'

[^1]: Down here there is A SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION OF SMALL TRADESMEN. This SOCIETY publishes a weekly rag g for the said protection. In that weekly our friend Seiler 'along with his wife' is pilloried as a 'SWINDLER'.

[^2]: BUT greater things are afoot. Pieper, thanks to his genius, has again been living a freebooter's existence since January and, despite the not inconsiderable SUBSIDIES provided by me, has been daily on the qui vive vis-à-vis his LANDLADY. NOW it has suddenly occurred to him that all he requires to become a great man is a a a venue of public gatherings in London. The inaugural meeting of the International Working Men's Association was held there in September 1864. - b Löwe von Calbe - c Stuttgart (Marx deliberately uses this word and a number of others in this paragraph in their South German dialectal form). - d Nickname of Jakob Venedey under which he was ridiculed by Heine in his poem 'Kobes I' (Kobes means Jakob in the Cologne dialect). - e Ludwig Börne - f Jeanette Wohl-Straus. Heine described Berne's relations with her in his 'Ludwig Börne'. - g Protection for Trade





**[p. 33]**

litde capital. Seiler's SISTER-IN-LAW, die GREENGROCER'S 2nd daughter, a tallow-candle in green spectacles, has long been mortally in love with the said Pieper. H e r entire person green like verdigris rather than veg., and GREENS to boot without ANY MEAT or FLESH WHATEVER. While declaring her to be ugly as the day, Pieper has nevertheless discovered that she is not without intelligence, of which she gives incontrovertible proof by regarding our Hanoverian lambkin as a German Byron manqué. So, the day before yesterday, therefore, Pieper, to whom this person clings, not simply like a burr b u t like a CATERPILLAR, resolved to pour out his heart to Seiler's father-in- law. H e did not wish to d o so in front of his 'beloved' for fear h e might have to kiss her, which indeed is HARD WORK for an occidental unaccustomed TO FEED UPON TALLOW. But in true Pieper-fashion, the declaration of love was combined with—a touch for a loan. Pieper could not disburden his heart to the GREENGROCER without inviting the GREENGROCER to disburden his POCKETS, not to say his till. O n the grounds, that is, of his needing a litde capital, SAY »MO POUNDS, TO CREATE HIMSELF A POSITION as a FASHIONABLE tutor. Meanwhile he intends to let his 'beloved' enjoy the pleasures of widowhood while still betrothed, nor will his compassion ever permit him to marry her. GREENS or n o GREENS, die whole business is most unsavoury, but Pieper imagines he will come out of it as a m a n of honour, i.e. AT A CERTAIN EPOCH LOOMING IN THE FUTURE repay down to the last farthing the advances h e 'hopes' to obtain from his would-be father-in-law, generously leaving him his daughter into the bargain. Since that fateful day h e has been back to my house only once, for a minute, while I was out. Called himself a 'happy man'. Litde Jenny called him 'BENEDICK THE MARRIED MAN',* but litde Laura said: 'BENEDICK WAS A

Liebknecht has at last achieved something, to wit, a litde Liebknecht.

By 'His Majesty's supreme and special command' my wife has received a passport from Berlin. In May she will travel to Trier with the whole FAMILY for 3-4 months.

Salut. Regards to Lupus.

K. M.

[^1]: WIT, HE IS BUT -A' CLOWN-, AND -A CHEAP CLOWN- TOO.' T h e children are constandy reading Shakespeare.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei avischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Pubhshed in English in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l r s t t n n * Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a Shakespeare, Much Ado about Nothing, Act V, Scene 4.



