---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "11. Engel s to Wilhelm Steffen. 15 April "
Page_Range: "71-72"
---

# 11. Engel s to Wilhelm Steffen. 15 April 

marry his tallow candle and that he doesn't get that little sum; it would serve him right.

Should the case arise, we must demonstrate our gratitude for the gallantry shown to your wife by supreme and special command.1 Whatever happens he b must be given his ALLOWANCE of champagne in his cachot?

I found the Lassalliads M most entertaining; the ringleted Jewish noddle must look charming indeed above the red nightshirt and the 'marquisian' drapery, while his every movement betrays the Polish Izzy. All things considered, die fellow must produce a most sordid and repulsive impression.

I am keeping Levy's letter here d and shall write to you, tomorrow if possible, about sundry matters concerning the workers' business. It would, by the way, be advisable to secure letters containing this sort of stuff with sealing wax. At the same time I shall return you Levy's letter.

I have already told you that I can hear again; three abscesses burst in my ear one after the other, and that did the trick.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

11

ENGELS TO WILHELM STEFFEN

Manchester, 15 April 1856

Dear Steffen,

Can you recommend a good map of Germany suitable for military studies and not too expensive—scale about 1:100,000 or, better still, 1:80,000, 1:60,000, etc. In addition a map, in rather

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, , , . , , . ^ . - • - . • . . r Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Mara and Published in English in full for the Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, f , r s t t u n e

[^2]: Vol. 29, Moscow, 1962

[^3]: IN BRIGHTON

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 33. - b Frederick William IV - c cell - d See this volume, pp. 30-31.



