---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "13. Mar x to Engels. 26 April "
Page_Range: "77-78"
---

# 13. Mar x to Engels. 26 April 



**[p. 13]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 26 April 1856 28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Frederic,

Enclosed you will find

1. 2 Kars PAPERS, third and final instalments.3

2. An article on the Duke of Yorkb which I gave Jones, and in which I imitate OLD Cobbett's manner tant bien que mal.c Sent especially for Lupus' information.

3. The SPEECH made by Frost, the old Chartist, in New York.d

4. A letter from Miquel. This last to be returned. For I have not yet replied, as I should like to have your detailed 'OPINION' before doing so. It's a somewhat ticklish matter. 'Questions, sometimes insidious',e and when replying it is difficult to know how far one can properly go.52

Que dites-vous du discours de M. de Walewski?f5S Everyone in London is furious with the GOVERNMENT and even the SHOPKEEPERS are mouthing revolutionary slogans.

If you can, send Pieper something. It is now possible that he will get a job as CORRECTOR on The People's Paper. All. I can do now is keep him in commons. I have taken him seriously to task for his silly antics, which have landed him on the streets again. I could tell you a thing or two about politics down here, but to do so by post might be risky.

The news from Paris in today's Advertiser contains a brief but interesting report on an action brought against some members of Marianne47; they're conducting themselves splendidly.

In the Presse (Paris) some edifying aspersions on Bonaparte's

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Fall of Kars, Articles III and IV - b K. Marx, 'The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument'. - c after a fashion - d The People's Paper, No. 208, 26 April 1856 - e H. Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Chapter 20. - f What do you say to M. de Walewski's speech? (The speech was reported in The Times, No. 22352, 26 April 1856.)



