---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "15. Mar x to Engels. 8 May "
Page_Range: "78-80"
---

# 15. Mar x to Engels. 8 May 



**[p. 43]**

législateur poète—Belmontet—by Pelletan, in which the latter has so insulted the 'empereur' 3 that he will probably be expelled.

Salut.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

Your

K. M.

Printed • according to the original

Published in English for the first time

14

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 May 1856 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Frederic,

I have another letter from Germany to send on to you. But since you haven't yet acknowledged receipt either of the PARCEL or of the letter enclosing Miquel's,b I don't know whether these things have reached you. Let me know by return. In the case of compromising letters, it's essential to be sure they are delivered.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

15

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: MARX T O ENGELS 5 4

[^5]: IN MANCHESTER

[^6]: [London,] 8 May c 1856 28 Dean Street, Soho DEAR Frederic,

[^7]: Received your letter.55 My PRESSURE u p o n you in YESTERDAY'S LETTER explicable d'abord^ by the fact that an earlier parcel of my wife's

[^8]: a Napoleon III - b See previous letter. - c April in the original - d first of all





**[p. 44]**

did not arrive in Manchester, although sent by post. Secondly, however, you know how a man feels when he's kept on the hop by piles. And such a man am I.

I am glad to hear that you and Lupus are entirely of my opinion with regard to Miquel's letter52—the attempt to digest this 'wisdom' fairly 'turned my stomach'.

Unless something goes wrong with the pecuniary arrangements I have made, my family will be leaving in 10 to 14 days at the latest." A pity you are so overworked, otherwise we might have done un petit tourb to Scodand.

1 shall carry out your commissions at die Museumc as soon as I go there again.

Enclosed: 2 letters, 1. from Imandt; 2. from Cologne.56 Would it not be best if I replied to the Cologne people through my wife? THERE EXISTS SOME JEALOUSY between Cologne and Düsseldorf AS TO THE LEADING OF THE PROLETARIAN MOVEMENT. BESIDES, I don't know whether the Cologne people are aware that the Düsseldorfers have completely broken with Lassalle who has fallen into general disrepute among them.

Yesterday the following comical missive arrived from Sheffield:

That is magnanimous, there being war to the death between The People's Paper and The Free Press, as between Chartism and Urquhartism generally.42 The great Ironside went one step further and decreed THAT THE THANKS OF THE COUNTRV WERE DUE TO DR. M.e ETC. It would have been much better had the chaps sent me the money they made out by reprinting the Palmerston articles under the title Story of the Life etc. (in pamphlet form).58

From New York Seiler has sent me—came today—'Das Recht deutscher vereinigter Staatenbürger in Europa' in the Democrat.1

Will never be read, not in this world at any rate.

Since handing over your £2 to Pieper I haven't set eyes on him. Moreover, Jones has sent word that, up till yesterday evening, he had not delivered the work he had accepted for The People's Paper.

[^1]: »Council Hall, Sheffield, Doctor, May 6th, '56. The Sheffield Foreign Affairs Committee instructs me to convey to you an expression of their warm thanks for the great public service you have rendered by your admirable exposé of the Kars Papers published in 77»« People's Paper A I have the Honour etc.

[^2]: Cyples, Secretary.*

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 33. - b short trip - c the British Museum Library - d K. Marx, 77«« Faü of Kars. - e Marx - l New-Yorker Demokrat



