---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "16. Mar x to Engels. 23 May "
Page_Range: "80-84"
---

# 16. Mar x to Engels. 23 May 



**[p. 45]**

Nous verrons.* If he wilfully throws away this opportunity as well, let him go to the devil. Now's his chance, the silly ass.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos! Have seen Heine's will59! A return to the 'living God', and a 'Recantation before God and man' if ever he wrote anything 'immoral'!

Didn't see Colonel Touroute again before he left for Germany. Enclosed letters not to be returned. Regards to Lupus.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jnjo Published in English in full for the first time

16

MARX TO ENGELS20

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 23 May 1856 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

The family went off yesterday.b I have been incapable of work this week, partly because of the TROUBLE in the house, partly because of a rheumaticky back such as I have never experienced before.

Herewith Bazancourt^the 'Napoleonic' account of the Crimean business.0 Might not something be made of it for Putnam's}60 It's urgent that I obtain the services of this firm since the money and gear needed for the journey have compelled me to accept through Zitschke a sole bill for £30 on myself, payable in 3 months' time. A man from Putnam's has been to see Freiligrath, and they are willing to take articles.

I have only read the excerpts from Bazancourt that were published in the French papers. To judge by them, it would appear to provide much amusing matter. The thing cannot, I

[^1]: a We shall see. - b See this volume, p. 33. - c Bazancourt, L'expédition de Crimée jvsqu' à la prise de Sébastopol.





**[p. 46]**

Trübner, who looked like accepting my Swedish stuff two months ago but then gave no further sign of life, wrote yesterday and arranged an entrevue3 on Tuesday to discuss the matter. That would provide 20 sheets of work.61

I am in a SERIOUS DILEMMA as to whether or not I should now go on a TRIP. On the one hand I've got to slog away at making money. On the other the doctorb has told me—and I believe he's right—that I should travel a bit and have a change of air, as my liver is again functioning irregularly. I AM NOT YET DECIDED what I should do. It's not as though staying here were especially economical, since I also have Pieper round my neck. But the main thing is my work.

As TO Bazancourt, let me know whether you need the first part as well. If nothing can be made of the thing it would be better not to buy it.

I am incapable of writing today, but must nevertheless ask you to clear up a philological doubt. In Henry IV, Shakespeare used the word 'hiren' for 'siren' and, according to a note made by that pedant, Johnson/ the form 'hiren' also occurs in other early English writers.d The substitution of h for s is QUITE in order, but might there not be some connection between 'hiren' and 'Hure',e

I have received some very curious information about Ruge's tragedy, the Neue Welt, in which 'the tragedy of love turns into a farce'. Shall tell you about it in my next.

Herzen is going to Switzerland. I await your COMMUNICATIONS on Ireland.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: and hence also 'siren'? Or with 'hoeren', auris,1 etc.? You can see TO WHICH LOW STATE OF SPIRIT I am DEPRESSED today from the great interest I show in this matter.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a interview - b Freund - c Marx means Johnson's notes in Plays of W. Shakespeare.

[^4]: With Notes of Samuel Johnson. King Henry IV is in Vol. 4 of this edition. - d Notably in George Peele's play The Turkish Mahomet and Hyrin in the Fair Greek [Trans.]. - e whore - ' to hear, hearing

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English in full for the first time







