---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "18. Engel s to Marx. 26 May "
Page_Range: "86-87"
---

# 18. Engel s to Marx. 26 May 



**[p. 51]**

in debt, and living in constant fear of the ENCUMBERED ESTATES COURT.66

About England's method of governing this country—repression and corruption (long before Bonaparte tried them)—more very shortly if you don't come up soon. What are the prospects?

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

18

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 26 May 1856

Dear Marx,

Herewith the article,11 but you should read it over first. Today the office again prevented me from doing so myself.

Bazancourta will be of some use—Bonaparte's Bat- rachomyomachia.67 But Vol. I absolutely essential. I shall send you 6/- worth of stamps for it tomorrow, or rather, they are enclosed herewith.

I would advise you to pack your bags at once, taking such papers as are absolutely necessary. Then you can work here as well as in Scotland, at least on certain subjects. We could do Bazancourt ±b together.60 Admittedly, you would have to do most of the work for, with business expanding rapidly, commerce is making such demands on me that there can be no thought of regular and sustained work. If you finished this thing here (1 article would of course suffice), you could always either do parliamentary articles here, or else take a trip to Scotland and get down to some hard work here on your return. Until the Pan-Slavism is finished I should be reluctant to saddle myself with

[^1]: a Bazancourt, L'expédition de Crimée jusqu' à la prise de Sébastopol. - b more or less



