---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "23. Marx to Isaac Ironside. 21 June "
Page_Range: "92-93"
---

# 23. Marx to Isaac Ironside. 21 June 



**[p. 57]**

Farewell my dear heart. A thousand kisses to you, and the children too, from

Your

Karl

First published in Annali, an. I, Milano, Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

23

MARX TO ISAAC IRONSIDE73

IN SHEFFIELD

[Draft]

Manchester, [21 June 1856] 34 Butler St., Greenheys

Dear Sir,

I received your letter d.d. June 14 this morning only, as it had to be sent to me here to Manchester where I shall stay for some weeks.

I have duly considered your proposal, and, on the whole, accede to it.74 In a matter like this, it is impossible to mention expressly every small particular, to agree upon the size of type pp., neither can I anticipate that any difficulties may arise therefrom, nor from the reservations to make as to 'copy used'.

I shall therefore provide you in time for next Saturday's but one's publication with fully 2 columns of matter and keep you amply supplied every week to that extent.

It would be most convenient to me (if your arrangements admit of it) to receive a remittance say after every fresh weekly publication.

As to your reprinting the papers in your serials, I have no objection, reserving to myself, of course, the right of using the materials, later on, in any way I may see it fit to use them.

As to the latter point you will think it only just, that should any points be suppressed, which in my conviction are of decisive

[^1]: As I am sure that you will not suppress historical truth out of prejudice or party-consideration []a

[^2]: a The sentence is unfinished in the original.



