---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "24. Marx to William C> pies. 22 July "
Page_Range: "93-94"
---

# 24. Marx to William C> pies. 22 July 



**[p. 58]**

historical importance, I shall consider myself obliged to stop the publication.

In thanking you for the serials you were so kind to send me, I cannot but regret that you did not think fit to communicate to me the proof-sheets of the 'Story of the life of Lord Palmerston'.58

Sentences, historical data, quotations from Palmerston's speeches—everything is so disfigured by errata that, in my opinion, the pamphlet, in its present form, is not only useless but positively mischievous.

A few words on the plan of the whole publicationa will suffice. I do not adopt the usual manner of opening the whole theme by general considerations, but on the contrary commence with facts.

In contradistinction to the usual manner of historical writers, I shall not commence this publication with general considerations, but with facts. The first chapter will be composed of despatches belonging to different epochs of that century, in order to show up the Russian spirit of English diplomacy during the 18th.c

I hope I need not tell you that I am no 'commercial' writer and that no []d

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

24

[London,] 22 July 1856

Dear Sir,

I write again myself to show that I bear not the least ill will against you for which, indeed, there would be no cause. In your

[^1]: MARX TO WILLIAM CYPLES75

[^2]: IN SHEFFIELD

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: a K. Marx, Revelations of the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century. - b This paragraph is crossed out in the original. - c Here the following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: 'There are to follow some English pamphlets belonging to the epoch of Peter I; having thus made the reader familiar 1) [with] the infamies of English diplomacy, 2) with the protest []. From one of these despatches you will see how England conspired with Russia to crush []. These despatches will form a more eloquent introduction to [].' - d The manuscript breaks off here.



