---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "28. Marx to jenny Marx. 8 August "
Page_Range: "101-102"
---

# 28. Marx to jenny Marx. 8 August 



**[p. 28]**

MARX T O JENNY MARX 8 2

IN TRIER

[London,] 8 August 1856 28 Dean Street, Soho

My one and only Sweetheart,

This morning, at the same time as your letter, I received a note from Frederic 3 containing 15 talers for Lenchen. b Acknowledge it, as he is most meticulous in such matters. More tomorrow; today I have the IMMORTAL COLLET' here in the room with me and am keeping him in check by saying * 'I am obliged to write some lines to Mrs Marx'*.

LILY-WHITE SANDY is settled IN REALITY, not IN FANCY. Much though I hanker after you and the children—and this QUITE indescribably— I should like you to stay on in Trier for another week. It would d o you and the children no end of good. More tomorrow.

Your

K. M.

P.S. T h e Urquhartites are being damned importunate. 0 A good thing financially. But I don't know whether, POLITICALLY, I ought to get too involved with the fellows. A thousand kisses, my beloved sweetheart.

It's ghastly for me, having to play the man of fashion chez Liebknecht now. HANG ITI On top of that, I have Pieper sleeping with me in your stead. HORRIBLE. In the same room, at any rate.

Engels is coming next week.ss That's a relief. For 3 weeks I've been as hypochondriacal as the devil.

[^1]: P.S.II. Lina d has got the famous post. Won't be taking it u p for weeks yet.

[^2]: First published in Annali, an. I, Milano, Printed according to the original 1958

[^3]: a Frederick Engels - b Helene Demuth - c See this volume, pp. 61-62. - d Caroline Schöler



