---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "30. Marx to Engels. 22 September "
Page_Range: "102-105"
---

# 30. Marx to Engels. 22 September 



**[p. 29]**

MARX TO COLLET DOBSON COLLET

IN LONDON

London, 11 August 1856 28 Dean St., Soho

Dear Sir,

I approve, of course, of the suggestions of your letter of the 8th inst. regarding the headings per 'chapters' and the cyphering of the notes at the bottom of the text.a As to the cutting of chapters into parts, you must of course use your discretion as called for by the exigences of space etc. The alterations considered necessary in Chapter II will be forwarded in the course of the week.

Y. f.

K. M. C. D. Collet, Esq.

30

[London,] 22 September 1856 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I would have ACKNOWLEDGED your last letter before this, but for ABOUT a fortnight past the whole day from morn till night has been spent in search of lodgings. In no circumstances could we remain

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS20

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a K. Marx, Revelations of the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century.





**[p. 68]**

'It is, to be sure, an unfavourable moment just now, since all genuine securities such as these have fallen sharply as a result of frenzied speculation in Crédit mobilier'15 and limited liability companies.'

If you can supply part of what is wanted, I think I can manage the remainder with the help of the pawnshop until the money arrives from Berlin. The worst of it is that there's no time to be lost.

I was terribly affected by the news of Weerth's death,85 which I found hard to believe. Freiligrath, too, has already written to me about an obituary. But I must confess that I can't think of a likely paper in Germany. The only possibility might be an obituary in the Tribune until the times permit us to do something bigger and better. WHAT IS YOUR OPINION?

Today I have been invited to dine with the Putnam's chapc who is over here again. I don't know whether I shall go. My poor spoken English might put me to shame.

The Tribune has returned me the unpublished articles. These are, ALL IN ALL, Pan-Slavismn and my articles on the DANUBIAN PRINCIPALITIES.3 Mr Dana says in his letter that, if I cannot place the things elsewhere, they will be legally responsible for any 'LOSS' incurred, since they failed to register their objections soon enough. In the opposite case, they expect to get PART of their EXPENSES back. Nous verrons.0

Bruno Bauer is bringing out 2 volumes of England.86 No doubt he will write at length about his cher frère'se PIGSTY. I don't know what else he has seen in England.

[^1]: a Ferdinand von Westphalen - b at present - c Frederick Olmsted of Putnam's Monthly Magazine - d We shall see. - e dear brother (Edgar Bauer)





**[p. 69]**

A Prussian amnesty is expected on 15 October. Otto's mother died leaving 2,000 talers; these were confiscated by the Prussian government to pay the 'costs of the Cologne trial'. l

Strohn was here last Friday. The fellow has put on an enormous amount of weight, in consequence of which his spirits seem to have improved SOMEWHAT at the expense of his wits. Nor is his expression now so wry—benevolent, RATHER.

I have heard all sorts of details concerning Heine, recounted to my wife in Paris by Reinhardt. Shall write about these at length some other time. For the present only that

'Eight had barely struck, yet she Was quaffing wine with laughter free'3

came true LITERALLY in his case. While his corpse was still in the mortuary—on the day of the funeral—the maquereauh of Mathilde the mild, angelic child, did in fact appear on the doorstep and fetch her away. The worthy 'Meissner', who doled out such sloppy rubbish about Heine to the German public,c was paid in cash by 'Mathilde' to sing the praises of this trollop who had tormented POOR Heine to death.

But now for another story about Moses Hess. That lad's fame WAS DUE TO A GREAT PART—TO Sazonov. When Hess and the Moses womand arrived in Paris, this Russian was in very sore straits, very down at heel, without money or credit and consequently very plebeian and revolutionary and receptive to ideas of world subversion. Sazonov heard that Moses was not without 'ducats'. He therefore took his stand behind Moses and in front of the Moses woman. The latter he bedded, the former he extolled AS A GREAT LITERARY LUMEN, putting him in touch with the editorial boards of reviews and newspapers. Vladimire OF COURSE, had a finger in every pie and a foot in every door. Thus he extracted enough ducats from the tight-fisted Moses to enable him to 'shine' again and to put out decoys for further credit. And with these Sazonov enticed a rich old Jewess with whom he entered into kosher WEDLOCK. From then on, however, he became a man of fashion again and turned

[^1]: a H. Heine, 'Ein Weib' (from Romanzen).- b pimp - c A. Meissner, Heinrich Heine. Erinnerungen. - d Sibylle Hess - e Nikolai Sazonov



