---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "31. Marx to Engels. 26 September "
Page_Range: "105-107"
---

# 31. Marx to Engels. 26 September 



**[p. 70]**

his back on Moses, declaring him to be A VERY COMMON AND SUBORDINATE FELLOW. T h e Moses woman, however, was heartlessly abandoned and she is now running round Paris, scolding and cursing and telling anyone who will listen about the perfidious Muscovite's betrayal. Such, in a manner of speaking, is the story of the Grandeur et Décadence de la Maison Moses? Have you seen Golovin's paper, Russia etc., now appearing in London?

Faute de moyens}' L'Homme has temporarily ceased publication. La Nation has ceased to exist. T h e only thing still in the same LINE, though much poorer, is Le National. Kindest regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English in full for the Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, f l r s t t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

31

London, 26 September 1856 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederick,

FIRST, I must ACKNOWLEDGE with THANKS RECEIPT of the money. I would have done so yesterday had we not been in a veritable HURLY-BURLY with our removal. It remains doubtful, moreover, whether we shall be out of here before Monday since, even with your money and what the pawnshop has yielded, we still haven't QUITE got the requisite amount. T h e present crisis on the European stock exchanges has come at an awkward time for us personally.

No news apart from what you may already know, namely that Stirner has died. A letter has also reached London, or so

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 2 0

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a The Grandeur and Decline of the House of Moses (an ironical allusion to Balzac's L'Histoire de la grandeur et de la décadence de Cézar Birotteau).- b For want of means





**[p. 71]**

Freiligrath tells me, from his 'ex-sweetheart'a in Australia, in which she says that she has married again but has at the same time turned religious and, by harping on the 'better life to come', has contrived to drive her novum hominemb into the 'madhouse'. This last is meant verbatim.

Well, I went to souper with the Putnam's man.c Besides myself, the only people present were Freiligrath and an old Yankee. The Putnam's man was a quiet, genial soul, the other Yankee a jaunty, witty chap. Putnam wants us if possible, after the Bazancourt,60 to revert to the 'SHIPS AGAINST WALLS' question, as being of special interest to Americans in connection with the recent war.'1 Then again, something on floating batteries and gunboats; light or heavy guns, etc. All this seems to be with an eye to an American war, at a closer or more distant time, against England. Besides these militaribus I am then to write on Heine. In short, we can now engage in REGULAR INTERCOURSE with this very 'good' house.

Considering the rent, the house I have taken is very nice and could hardly have been let so cheaply were not the immediate neighbourhood, roads, etc., SOMEWHAT UNFINISHED. When you come up to London you'll find a complete HOME.

WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE ASPECT OF THE MONEY MARKET? There is no doubt that the increases in the discount rate on the Continent are partly associated with the appreciation of silver against gold due to the Californian and Australian gold (the Belgian Bank is now giving only 19 frs. 40 c.—silver—for one napoléon d'or") and hence bullion dealers everywhere where gold and silver are the legal STANDARD are withdrawing the latter from the banks. But whatever the reason for the increases in the discount rate, these are at least precipitating the DOWNFALL of the vast speculative transactions and, more specifically, of the GRAND PAWNINGSHOP AT PARIS.' I don't believe that the great monetary crisis will outlast the winter of 1857. Those stupid asses, the BRITISHERS, imagine that this time all is SOUND over here, as opposed to the Continent. Apart from the intimate connection between the OLD LADY OF THREADNEEDLE STREET and the Paris concern,87 the asses overlook the fact that a large part of English capital is tied up in continental credits and that their SOUND' OVERTRADING (exports this year are expected to reach £110 million) is based on the Continent's UNSOUND' SPECULATION, just as their civilisational propaganda of 1854-56 was on the coup d'état of

[^1]: a Marie Wilhelmine Dähnhardt - *> new man - c Frederick Olmsted - ä the Crimean war, 1853-56 - e napoléon d'or—a twenty-franc gold coin issued by Napoleon I - f probably the Bank of France



