---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "32. Engels to Marx. Not before 27 September "
Page_Range: "107-109"
---

# 32. Engels to Marx. Not before 27 September 



**[p. 72]**

1851. This time, however, as opposed to earlier crises, France has discovered the form in which speculation could be and has been propagated throughout the whole of Europe. In contrast to the Gallic raffinement of St. Simonism,88 STOCKJOBBERY and imperialism, your English speculator at home appears to have reverted to the primitive form of simple and UNMITIGATED FRAUD. Witness Strahan, Paul and Bates, the TIPPERARY BANK OF SADLEIR MEMORY, the GREAT CITY FRAUDS OF Davidson, Cole and Co., now the ROYAL BRITISH BANK and, finally, the Crystal Palace affair89 (4,000 bogus shares put into circulation). The BRITISHERS abroad speculate under continental COLOURS, those at home revert to fraude simple, and that's what the chaps call a SOUND STATE OF COMMERCE'.90

This time, by the by, the thing has assumed European dimensions such as have never been seen before, and I don't suppose we'll be able to spend much longer here merely as spectators. The very fact that I've at last got round to setting up house again and sending for my books9 seems to me to prove that the 'mobilisation' of our persons is AT HAND.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

32

ENGELS TO MARX92

[Manchester, not before 27 September 1856]

[] As regards Weerth85 I shall write to [] in Berlin, who might perhaps get something into a paper, n'importe3 which, so long as it appears. For 10 days and more after my return from London 83 Lupus did not breathe a word of the news and not until quite late, just before 11 o'clock on the eve of my old man's

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Man, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, . , . . , , , jgi3 Published in English in lull for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a no matter



You might send me the Pan-Slavism11 when you have an opportunity. As soon as I have the time I shall revise the thing and knock it into reasonable shape—for Putnam's (?) or anything else that might turn up in the meantime. Now, while the mischief is still in progress, I would offer the 'PRINCIPALITIES'3 to an English paper or MONTHLY. How are things going on with Urquhart []61

very doubtful about it [] I can see no possibility so far. In any case, we shall not be affected by the amnesty.

The stories about Mosesa and the Moses woman b made us laugh a great deal.c So, just like Ewerbeck, il s'est acheté une place au Père-Lachaise de la littérature française.6 9S

Have not seen Golovin's Russia. You might send one or 2 issues so that I can see what it's like; it's quite unknown up here.

Bazancourt still on the stocks.60 I think I shall finish it in about 10 days or a fortnight. It's not going so quickly after all, you see, I had no time to do any preparatory work. If only I had my Tribune articles on the war94! Now all the material has to be got together again. After this, we can offer them SHIPS AGAINST WALLS and then we should manage to keep the ball rolling all right.

That gold has depreciated against silver is no longer in any doubt. However it is also a fact that silver has vanished, but where to, I cannot quite make out. Such is the state of confusion that a great deal must have been buried or tucked away in China. Again, the BALANCE OF TRADE has recently been extremely favourable to India and China vis-à-vis England, the Continent and America taken together. At all events it must be highly gratifying for John Bull to find that he is already worth 6d IN THE POUND less.

The clouds gathering over the money market are sombre indeed, and the Constitutionnel's old HORIZON POLITIQUE- may well come into its own again.95 Last Tuesday's affair at the Bank, when 1 million in gold was withdrawn, is significant. It almost looks as though the storm is about to break, but this might, of course, be no more than a prelude. In theory, the crash cannot come until Russia is right up to the neck in speculation, but this is hardly to

[^1]: a Moses Hess - b Sibylle Hess - c See this volume, pp. 69-70. - d He has bought himself a place in the Père-Lachaise of French literature.



