---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "41. Marx to Engels. 14 January "
Page_Range: "127-128"
---

# 41. Marx to Engels. 14 January 



**[p. 41]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 January 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

Edgar von Westphalen has sent over a man—address en- closed—with two letters, one for me, and one for you. This man Erich wishes to establish connections with London business men and then return to New York. He has recommendations from New York, but none from England. With regard to Edgar's letter, he has given you and myself as references, you as an English merchant, me as correspondent of the New-York Tribune. I told him that we couldn't possibly provide information about his financial circumstances, since we knew nothing of them. REPLY: neither were we required to do so, but only to confirm, if asked, that he was 'Erich' of New York and had been 'recommended' to us from that quarter. IT IS ALTOGETHER A SILLY BUSINESS of the kind often initiated by Edgar. The fellow seems to be a decent sort of chap and I couldn't, of course, tell him that a recommendation from my brother-in-law was likely to be more of a hindrance than a help, even in our case. As regards yourself, I naturally made no promises but merely undertook to send you Edgar's letter, at the same time informing you that the 'recommendation', if requested, should au fond" be restricted to confirming the man's identity.

Cornelius will shortly be leaving London. Is to be manager of a joint stock mining company in Nassau. He has offered Roesgen's cousin what is said to be a good position (in an emigration agency) in Le Havre. Guardians received. The FACT concerning the floods is

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: 119 INTERESTING.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a by and large



