---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "43. Engels to Marx. About 22 January "
Page_Range: "131-132"
---

# 43. Engels to Marx. About 22 January 



**[p. 43]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, about 22 January 1857]126

Dear Marx,

Your letter arrived like a bolt from the blue. I had believed that everything was going splendidly at last—you in a decent house and the whole BUSINESS settled; and now it turns out that everything's in doubt. What damned stingy fellows these Yankees are; the people on the Tribune seem to imagine that, having squeezed you like a lemon, they must now proceed to squeeze another one. But the manner in which they are trying to break things off is particularly mean and cowardly. They want to force you to take the initiative. Furthermore, ever since Cluss fell so strangely silent, we've not had one reliable man in the whole of America.

Que faire cependant?" Since the Tribune is definitely intent on breaking with you this time, I think the best thing would be to establish connections with another New York paper. Might not something be arranged with the Herald or the Times?b In your place I would at once make a move and keep the chaps on the Tribune dangling until everything is arranged. In view of the fellows' shabby behaviour you need only consult your own interests and show no consideration for them. If you think that an indirect move w.ould be better, let me know. I will gladly carry out the negotiations in my name, so that you shan't be compromised; I could write saying I have reason to believe that you don't get on as well as you used to with the Tribune people and that some arrangement might perhaps be made, etc., etc. Enfin" anytfiing you want, pourvu que quelque chose soit faite.d

I wouldn't put it beyond the Tribune fellows to have stirred up trouble with Putnam too. I should write at once to Putnam to clear the matter up. One doesn't even know whether to write the article on coastal fortifications or not.e At all events it would be advisable to keep this source of income open as well.

I shall send you £5 early in February and for the time being you can count on getting this every month. Even if it means my

[^1]: a But what's to be done? - b The New-York Herald and The New-York Times - c In short - d provided that something is done - e See this volume, p. 81.



