---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "44. Marx to Engels. 23 January "
Page_Range: "132-134"
---

# 44. Marx to Engels. 23 January 



**[p. 97]**

facing the new financial year with a load of debts, c'est égal? I only wish you had told me about the business a fortnight earlier. For my Christmas present my old man gave me the money to buy a horse and, as there was a good one going, I bought it last week. If I'd known about this business of yours I would have waited a month or two and saved the cost of its keep. But NEVER MIND, that doesn't have to be paid for straight away. But I'm exceedingly vexed that I should be keeping a horse here while you and your family are down on your luck in London. It goes without saying, by the way, that you shouldn't let the promise of £5 a month deter you from approaching me again in case of hardships, for if anything can be done I shall do it. Anyhow, I've got to turn over a new leaf; I've been leading far too frivolous an existence of late.

Warm regards to your wife and children and let me know soon what you propose to do and how things stand.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, „ , , . , , . ^ . . . r , r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Pubhshed m Engl.sh for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

44

[London,] 23 January 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

D'abord,h very many thanks for your kind letter. I wrote to Olmsted about 10 days ago; am therefore awaiting his reply. It strikes me that Dana's annoyance over Freiligrath's blabbing his secret has something to do with the Tribunes

[^1]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS82

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a no matter - b First





**[p. 98]**

behaviour, or rather with the fact that Dana has not brought his influence to bear.127

To work for The New-York Herald is out of the question; The New-York Times is the one to go for. I am thinking of approaching them unobtrusively through Dr Abraham Jacobi, who is at least discreet and whose quiet manner seems to impress the Yankees GENERALLY. I intend to write to him next Tuesday, and at the same time to Dana in such a manner as will at any rate involve him in a contretemps more disagreeable than he had bargained for. I should be grateful if you could let me have by Tuesday—after Tuesday I shall probably discontinue the articles for the Tribune pending further news from New York—a military article on Persia.11 No need for much detail this time. Just a few general strategic VIEWS. The Tribune probably imagines that, now they have turned me out, I shall resign myself to abandoning the American camp altogether. The prospect of their 'military' and 'financial' monopoly going over to another paper is hardly likely to please them. Accordingly, I have today sent them a 'financial' piece. 28 An introduction to the Persian war,129 however cursory, would be important because it would give them to understand that we still have a 'WAR' up our sleeves with which other papers could be helped to make a splash. The (military) prospects of the Russians and English need only be hinted at, of course.

So I shall postpone any outright rupture until I find out whether I can fix anything up elsewhere in New York. If I cannot and the Tribune, for its part, does not change its attitude, then the break will have to be made, of course. But in a sordid contest like this I believe it important to gain time. It seems to me the Tribune has come to believe that, since the 'great turn' taken by events in America,1S0 it can dispense with all special editions (European ones, at least). It's truly nauseating that one should be condemned to count it a blessing when taken aboard by a blotting-paper vendor such as this. To crush up bones, grind them and make them into soup like PAUPERS in the WORKHOUSE—that's what the political work to which one is condemned in such large measure in a CONCERN like this boils down to. I am aware I have been an ass in giving these laddies more than their money's worth—not just recently but for years past.

Pieper is taking a schoolmaster's post SOMEWHERE between Portsmouth and Brighton; has been chasing after something of the kind for months.

[^1]: F. Engels, 'Prospects of the Anglo-Persian War'.



