---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "49. Engels to Marx. 11 March "
Page_Range: "138-141"
---

# 49. Engels to Marx. 11 March 



**[p. 48]**

ENGELS TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH 1M

IN LONDON

[Manchester, not later than 25 February 1857]

The only literary piece of Weerth's that has arrived here so far is a humoristic history of trade (a fragment from the Brussels- Bradford period, 1845-47),a but Steinthal is expecting a further packing case of papers. I shall most willingly do all I can to get the things, but it is important that Weerth's brotherb should write a letter for me, so that I shall have some kind of authorisation. There should hardly be much difficulty; Steinthal is perfectly willing to help. But as regards details probably more than one point of disagreement will crop up.

The diaries, as far as my knowledge of them from Weerth's last stay here goes, contain only matter-of-fact notes.

Meanwhile, as I have already said, as soon as I am authorised to collect the things, I shall certainly make sure that I get everything

49

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 11 March 1857 Dear Marx,

It's rather as though God and the universe had conspired to stop me writing to you. Whenever I think I have caught up to

[^1]: First published in: M. Häckel, Freiligraths Printed according to the manus- Briefwechsel mit Marx und Engels, Teil I, cript of Freiligrath's letter Berlin, 1968

[^2]: Published in English lor the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a G. Weerth, 'Humoristische Skizzen aus dem deutschen Handelsleben', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 318, 14 November 1847; No. 337, 3 December 1847; No. 348, 14 December 1847; No. 33, 2 February 1848 (the middle part is extant in manuscript, the ending was published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 1-4, 1-4 June 1848; No. 16, 16 June 1848; No. 18, 18 June 1848; No. 28, 28 June 1848; No. 36, 6 July 1848). - b Karl Weerth





**[p. 104]**

some extent with my commercial rubbish, I discover a whole pile of unsuspected arrears, am overrun by chaps, have to reply to hundreds of business queries on behalf of my old man and pander to fresh whims of Mr Gottfr.'s.a Just to make sure that I am sitting really fast, Freiligrath saddles me with Prussian ex-lieutenants, dabblers in bonds, who spend the entire day trying to borrow money (something he, Freiligrath, himself thought fit to warn me against) and who, after their departure, send me pawn tickets so that I can redeem their watches at my own expense. I am not in the least obliged to Freiligrath for landing me with the importu- nate fellow.b What is more I wrote to him today about my adventure with the brute. Let him clear the business up himself.

Last Friday0 Mr Ernst Dronke turned up at the office all of a sudden from Glasgow. He was here for only an hour or two on business. I saw him almost exclusively in the presence of Charles,d

when it wouldn't have done to argue with him or treat him roughly. On top of that his arrival was so sudden that I was unable to recall all of his intrigues. I treated him with reserve, just as I would treat an ordinary commercial traveller with whom I was only superficially acquainted and confined my remarks to trifling matters, and he was extremely careful to avoid any subject relating to the party. He shoved off during the afternoon and intends to come back in May, at which time I shall probably be in London. I hope he will remain a commerçant all his days; he certainly looks the part and the carefree existence seems greatly to his liking.

I presume you got the £5 note I sent you last Friday (or was it Thursday?).

The TORIES, FREETRADERS and Peelites could have done Pam no greater favour than put him in a minority over this question.134

[^1]: What luck the fellow has and how stupid are his opponents! There is a great deal of agitation up here just now, but since 4,000 new VOTERS are on the register, all small SHOPKEEPERS and CLERKS and OVERLOOKERS, and therefore predominantly pro-Bright, it is unlikely that there will be any change. Bob Lowe and Sir J. Potter (A BORN ALDERMAN 135 and once a mighty wencher) are to be nominated here. WILL NOT DO. YOU could probably let me have some details about Bob Lowe's early exploits in Australia and elsewhere. These would be very useful just now. 136

[^2]: a Gottfried Ermen - b Hugo von Selmnitz - c 6 March - d Charles Roesgen





**[p. 105]**

What is the price of Mieroslawski's thick book on Poland?3 It's really essential to have a compendium of this kind—and what is the price of Lelewel's work on which it is based,b if you can find this out?

I shall, by the way, send you a few more Guardians, they contain some really capital witticisms. I suppose you got the six copies I sent you recently (IN 2 LOTS)? Morny has already smelt a rat good and proper; these purchases the fellow is making in Russia must worry Bonaparte to death. That was also a fine to-do over the Docks Napoléon, Berryer jeunec and Fox,Henderson & Co.137—you must have read about it in The Times?

I'm most anxious to hear how the Tribune affair is progressing and likewise what you wrote to Olmsted. I think that I shall shortly be able to start work again and will see whether anything can be made out of China. The affair is bound to yield some interesting military aspect/ But no hope of that so long as I have to slave away in the office until 8 o'clock each evening and can't start work till 10 o'clock, after SUPPER, etc., etc., is over. At present I have to be at the office by 10 o'clock in the morning at the very latest and ACCORDINGLY go to bed at about one. C'est embêtant!* Just when one has really got into one's stride, one has to go to bed; cela ne va pas. Enfin, nous verrons? This summer things have got to be reorganised, otherwise there'll be a rumpus at the office. I intend to organise myself in such a way that I work from 10 to 5 or 6 and then leave and be damned to the business.

Warm regards to your wife and children. You are all well, I hope?

F. E.

[^1]: Tout à toi.h

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and ! ^ b h s h e d , n E n g h s h f ° r t h e first

[^3]: Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^4]: time

[^5]: a L. Mieroslawski, De la nationalité polonaise dans l'équilibre européen. - b J. Lelevel, Histoire de Pologne, Tomes I-II. - c junior - d This probably refers to a report from Paris in The Times, No. 22624. 10 March 1857. - « F. Engels, 'The New English Expedition in China'. - ! It's a nuisance! - s that won't do. Well, we shall see. - h All yours.



