---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "51. Engels to Marx. 20 March "
Page_Range: "144-145"
---

# 51. Engels to Marx. 20 March 



**[p. 51]**

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 20 March 1857

Dear Marx,

It had already occurred to me that you might once again be in something of a hole. Whatever can be done by me, will be done. If at all possible I'll send you another five-pound note next week or, if I can't get hold of one, a POST OFFICE ORDER. In the latter case, be sure to let me know at what POST OFFICE I should make it payable. I've had very heavy debts to pay this month, with people tracking me down to the office, so that there was no option but to stump up. Otherwise you'd have had the five pounds straight away. It's lucky, by the way, that this parliament business has begun, with China thrown in for good measure 1S4; at this juncture the Tribune will need help again and will be forced to come to TERMS.

I've been sounding the Guardian chap about the possibility of making contact with REVIEWS and MAGAZINES up here. But this chap, too, seems to be hunting round in the hope of fixing up something for himself and there's not much to be got out of him. However, I shall see. Since he knows my opinion of Palmerston and declares it to be PREPOSTEROUS he is all the less likely to give us a recommendation in politicis.a All the same, I have a certain HOLD ON THE FELLOW but as yet haven't devised any way of exploiting it.

I share your view of Palmerston's intentions and prospects in the new parliament. Bonapartist despotism wielded by Pam together with a Corps législatif.123 We shall see what that leads to.

According to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung? the Circassians (which, not specified) have actually appointed Bangya 'head of the house'; he was selected for this snug berth precisely because he is a foreigner, so that none of the native chiefs could complain of having been slighted. What has become of Sefer Pasha (a man of quite a different stamp to Koscielski) is far from clear. I regard the whole thing as a stroke of genius on the part of the Russians, and we shall probably hear no more of the 300 Polish Spartans. H6

The Nord must have changed its mind again. The Guardian's Brussels correspondent quotes passages that are violently anti-

[^1]: a as far as politics are concerned - b 'Pera. 20 Febr.', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 63, 4 March 1857.



