---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "52. Marx to Engels. 24 March "
Page_Range: "145-147"
---

# 52. Marx to Engels. 24 March 



**[p. 110]**

Palmerston. Can you let me have the most relevant bit? That sort of thing never comes my way here and in any controversy I must always have CHAPTER AND VERSE immediately to hand.

While putting my old newspapers in order recently, I discovered the loss of one of the main bundles of English papers and cuttings from the Guardian, Free Press, etc., etc. Nothing, luckily, connected with our party archives—they are safely stored away. But everything, with a few exceptions, relating to Palmerston—Tucker's pamphlets,147 the cuttings containing your articles you had sent me (many of these are also being sat on by Lupus, etc.). I needed and was looking for them precisely in order to refresh my memory as to detail. Have you got any duplicates you could send me, likewise the full text of your articles which appeared in Urquhart's London paper61? These should be fairly easy to get hold of. I would find the things particularly handy just now.

Bob Lowe's prospects up here are poor. Some of the philistines have come out against Bright; however I believe he will scrape through this time. Lowe will make an ass of himself as soon as he arrives here. But it would be splendid were he to get in.136

Warm regards to your wife and children. Write again soon and tell me how your wife is.

Your

F. E.

52

London, 24 March 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

Herewith some anti-Palmerstoniana, viz.: 1. Betrayal of England, 2 COPIES. (NB. The self-same Coningham who here reproduces

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS20

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 111]**

excerpts from Anstey's speech2 is now an ultra-PALMERSTONi AN candidate in Brighton.) 2. TVCKER-PAMPHLETS,1*1 8 COPIES. 3. Anstey's speech} 4. Palmerston for Premier. 5. Palmerston in Three Epochs.0

(With the exception of the Hungarian affair, cribbed from Urquhart, the remainder has been lifted by Mr Wilks—just like him, of course—from my articles in the Tribune.14*) No need for you to preserve numbers 1 and 2; but possibly numbers 3, 4 and 5. Tomorrow, if I can find them, I shall send a few other pamphlets. As TO THE Nord, note that the Post itself (in one of the numbers appearing between 4 and 9 March) carried the article I have mentioned.*1 Later, however, it changed its tune.

Now for PRIVATE AFFAIRS. D'abord' a letter has arrived from the Tribune, which I shall send you as soon as I have answered it. My threat to write to another paper has worked after all, at least up to a point. Despite its very friendly tone, the letter shows that I was not mistaken about these gentlemen. For what they propose is to pay for one article a week, whether or not they print it; the second I send at my own risk, and draw on it if printed. Thus they are au fait1 cutting me down by one half. However I shall agree to it and must agree to it Also, if things in England take the course I think they will, it won't be long before my income reaches its former level again.

I'm very sorry that, in the meantime, I must continue to depend on you, having so greatly fallen into arrears that everything that could be pawned has been pawned and the drop in income cannot be made up until I have found some new resource. On top of that, and since I cannot after all withhold the FACT from you, my wife is IN HIGHLY INTERESTING CIRCUMSTANCES. However, all I intended in my last was to explain why I hadn't answered for so long— certainly not ANY I HING ELSE. YOU will understand that even the most equable of men—and in a mess such as this I do INDEED possess a great deal of equanimity—will sometimes lose patience and let himself go, especially vis à vis his friends.

[^1]: I should be most grateful if you could let me have a few 'humorous' LINES, SAY SO OR IOO ONES, on the Orlandian bravery g evinced by the English in Persia and before Canton.134 The Bushire expedition,1 9 as you will have seen, pivoted mainly on the

[^2]: a Coningham made use of Th. Anstey's speeches delivered during the debates in the House of Commons from 8 February to 1 March 1848. - b in the House of Commons on 23 February 1848 - c by W. Wilks - d 'From Our Own Correspon- dent. Brussels, March 6', The Morning Post, No. 25955, 9 March 1857 (see also this volume, p. 107). - e First - f in effect - 8 L. Ariosto, L'Orlando furioso.



