---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "53. Marx to Collet Dobson Collet. 25 March "
Page_Range: "147-148"
---

# 53. Marx to Collet Dobson Collet. 25 March 



**[p. 112]**

espionage of one Captain Jones, who was sent to Bushire u n d e r IALSE PRETENCES as POLITICAL AGENT. Probably more tomorrow, as I want to send you the pamphlets today.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

NB. It does after all make a difference whether one stages a coup d'état first and elections afterwards, or elections first with a subsequent coup d'état in view. Without doubt Palmerston, or at least his PAPERS, have OVERDONE THEIR PART. Take the Advertiser, for instance, wallowing in filth u p to its eyebrows. This has, OF COURSE, evoked a measure of reaction.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, . jgi3 Published in English in full for the first time

53

MARX T O C O L L E T DOBSON C O L L E T

[Draft] [London,] 25 March 1857

Dear Sir,

Enclosed Chapter V of the diplomatic relations.61 T h e forward- ing of the gratification d u e for the printed contributions would oblige me. Should your time permit, you would oblige me by calling at my house any day except Friday. I have to communicate you some highly important information. 3

T h e illness of Mrs Marx does not allow m e seeing you at Ampton-place.

Mr D. Collet

Yours truly

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: etc.

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first

[^4]: a Here Marx crossed out the words 'respecting Circassia' (a reference to the revealing material on J. Bangya which Marx included in his article 'A Traitor in Circassia').



