---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "54. Marx to Engels. 31 March "
Page_Range: "148-149"
---

# 54. Marx to Engels. 31 March 



**[p. 54]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 31 March 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

Received the £ 5 . I should like you to send me some Manchester Examiners if convenient. T h e BRIGHT PARTY'S EXPLANATIONS are of interest to me just now. It is only through their defeat that the election has acquired any historical POINT.134 Palmerston's position will become dangerous only now, when he has a commanding majority inside Parliament, whereas outside Parliament there is a recrudescence— for the first time since the Anti-Corn Law League 15°—of SERIOUS ANTI-MINISTERIAL AGITATION. England is entering upon a sérieuse crisis—as The Times already intimates, with its reference to the CLOUD WHICH IT SEES GATHERING a — a n d if the MOVE is resumed on the Continent, John Bull will not maintain the stance of supercilious detachment he adopted in 1848. Pam's victory marks the culmination of events which began in June 1848.151 Amongst the more intelligent members of the London PUBLIC the news from Manchester, accompanied as it was by a commentary in the shape of Pam's brazen address and speech,b was greeted with a kind of stupefaction. Seen from h e r e — a n d all are unanimous on this point—Manchester has brought disgrace, serious disgrace, upon itself. Had Punch not been bought by Pam—Taylor, a chief editor thereof, has been given a post at the General Board of Health at a salary of £1,000—Potter, Turner, and Garnett, at any rate, would have figured in it next Wednesday. Send me some particulars about these laddies and their WHEREABOUTS.

Mr Dronke has written to Freiligrath telling him that he 'will break with his Jew and set u p as an independent agent'.

[^1]: I have provided Urquhart with some notes on Bangya c—in view of the latter's connections with Constantinople and Circassia.

[^2]: a 'Sir De Lacy Evans is the first-born', The Times, No. 22641, 30 March 1857 (leader). - b Palmerston's speech before the electors of Tiverton published in The Times, No. 22641, 30 March 1857. - c K. Marx, 'A Traitor in Circassia'.



