---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "55. Engels to Marx. 31 March "
Page_Range: "149-152"
---

# 55. Engels to Marx. 31 March 



**[p. 114]**

Also Dana's letter. Let me have it back. In his enumeration of the articles published he mentions only the last ones,2 and even some of these he didn't publish until 5 or 6 weeks after their arrival in New York when he saw that things were taking a new turn.152 His proposal re money is the best possible indication that I was not mistaken about the gentleman's intentions. His remark about the length of the articles suits me well. I shall have all the less to send. What strikes me, though, is that for months past he has been able to find 2 or 3 columns for the most insipid London

GOSSIP.

In Prussia too there is a minor parliamentary crisis. Once AGAIN the dictum 'Geniality leaves off where money matters begin'15S

would seem to be proving true there.

It seems highly probable that the Swiss will agree to expel all the refugees.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Did you take note of the bubbles that burst last week—the Australian Agricultural Company, the London and Eastern Bank, and the North of Europe Steam Company, one of the directors being Mr Peto?

55

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 31 March 1857 Dear Marx,

You will have received the £5 note, K/S 84562, this morning. As regards 'depending on' me, don't give it another thought. I should

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'The Anglo-Persian War', 'The Maritime Commerce of Austria'.

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 115]**

take umbrage if you were not to inform me when the SOVEREIGNS' armed intervention is required. I shall see how my finances go in April; I think I shall be able to manage a bit more during the second half, at any rate.

The Tribune's proposal is most cunning and, since the chaps are practically certain to print only one article a week, I shouldn't send two save on special occasions such as the present elections, etc., etc. However, circumstances will come to your aid, and in all probability the good Yankees will have no reason to complain about the DULLNESS OF EUROPEAN POLITICS this summer and autumn, while their own merry-go-round will gradually come to a halt.

I have hardly followed the Persian and Chinese military ventures3 at all, indeed there has been a great dearth of detail. About Captain Jones I know nothing. It would now be utterly impossible to get together the necessary material, but when we get fuller news about the last big cavalry attack in Persia I shall see what can be done.

The pamphlets have arrived.15 If only I could get hold of your old Tribune articles!148 Most of the stuff is in them. Washington Wilksc and Palmerston for Premier contain only generalities, and Chisholm Anstey's speech*1 is fearfully décousu* though very important, more especially by reason of the personal matters relating to the Portfolio154 but also, here and there, by reason of its contents. The only really cogent pamphlets are your two Tucker pamphlets, especially Unklar Skelessi.u If you can supply me with any more material, tant mieux* I have taken steps to improve the storage arrangements.

The eight thousand philistines who voted for the fattest man in Manchester (Potter) because he makes up for his lack of brains by the size of his bottom, are already ashamed of their victory. All the same, the elections have made an enormous impression here, and the 'Manchester' Party134 is beginning to take stock of its performance over the past 6 years and to discover in what it has railed. I don't think we shall hear very much more of PEACE-PARTY TALK 155 for the time being, while on the other hand Bright (if he rallies) will, with one or two others, undoubtedly advocate a more far-reaching electoral reform and, before long, Jones may well receive some propositions from these bourgeois. For Pam the most gratifying thing must be his triumph over Bright, Gibson, Cobden,

[^1]: •' A reference to the Anglo-Persian war of 1856-57 and the second Opium War, 1856-60. - b See this volume, pp. 110-11.- c W. Wilks, Palmerston in Three Epochs. - d in the House of Commons on 23 February 1848 - e disjointed - f so much the better





**[p. 116]**

This time Philistia was tremendously divided. T h e vast majority of the bourgeoisie, a small majority of the lower-middle class, against Bright and Gibson. Quakers ' 6 and Catholics for Bright to a man; the Greeks likewise; the established Germans against him. A d r u n k e n anti-Bright m a n shouted: ' W E WONT HAVE HOME POLICY, WE WANT FOREIGN POLICY.' What the rationale of the local elections more or less amounts to is: T o hell with all questions of reform and class matters. After all, we philistines form the majority of voters, cela suffit.6 T h e clamour against the aristocracy, etc., is tedious and produces no tangible result. W E DEARLY LOVE A LORD FOR ALL THAT. We've got FREE TRADE and as much bourgeois social reform as we require. We're flourishing like mad, especially since Pam reduced war INCOME TAX. So let's all foregather on territory where we are all equal, and let's be ENGLISHMEN, John Bulls, under the leadership of that TRULY BRITISH MINISTER Pam. Such is the present mood of the majority of philistines.

What is piquant about the business u p here is the burial of the Anti-Corn Law League 1 5 0; Smith P. Robinson (HON. SEC) and George Wilson, 'THAT RESPECTABLE FIXTURE' are being thrown out of Newalls Buildings 1 5 and the GREAT LIBERAL PARTY is casting about for a new organisation. G. Wilson loses his snug berth and his status on the strength of which he rose to be CHAIRMAN of the Lancashire and Yorkshire railways at a salary of £1,000 per a n n u m — a n o t h e r snug berth that will soon go west, permitting

[^1]: a we shall have unadulterated Palmerston - b 'From Our Own Correspondent. Brussels, March 6', The Morning Post, No. 25955, 9 March 1857. - c 'One of the greatest advantages', The Times, No. 22634, 21 March 1857. - d that suffices



