---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "56. Engels to Marx. 2 April "
Page_Range: "152-153"
---

# 56. Engels to Marx. 2 April 



**[p. 117]**

Wilson to go back to starch manufacturing as in the days of PROTECTION. But your Manchester philistine—even if a partisan of Bright—heaves a sigh of relief at the long-awaited demise of that old incubus, THE LEAGUE136!

Apropos, I believe that the Ch. Anstey pamphlet contains only a small part of Pam's reply2—the debate lasted 4 days. Couldn't you get hold of the rest? And could you send me a copy of Urquhart's new rag, The Free Press" or whatever it's called? What is there in it by you?

NB. You might also, s'il y a lieu,h send me the tides of anything else of any use concerning the Pam affair; I could then get them myself up here.

Hearty congratulations on your family prospects. What are the girls doing? They must be quite big by now. I look forward very much to seeing them at Whitsun. Warm regards to them and your wife.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, • > • r Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t i m e

56

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 2 April 1857

D. M.,

Potter is a great big, enormously fat fellow, aged about 46 years, red haired and red faced, has been mayor of Manchester 3 times, VERY JOLLY,' HAS NO BRAINS, but plenty of belly and bottom, introduced robes into the corporation here on the occasion OF THE QUEENS VISIT, for which he was dubbed a knight, is a lifelong whoremonger (a

[^1]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Engels presumably refers to the pamphlet The Betrayal of England, compiled of Anstey's speeches in the House of Commons debate lasting from 8 February to 1 March 1848. - b if called for



