---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "57. Marx to Engels. 9 April "
Page_Range: "153-156"
---

# 57. Marx to Engels. 9 April 



**[p. 118]**

BACHELOR still), on particularly intimate terms with the celebrated Miss Chester (alias Polly Evans) whose brothel he has twice fitted out and towards whose LAW EXPENSES he allegedly contributed £50 when she appeared before the Liverpool Assizes on a charge of abortion and was acquitted. A man who will greatly please the COUNTRY SQUIRES and whose reputation rests solely on the fact that his father, Sir Thomas Potter, KNIGHT, was once leader of the local liberal movement and introduced Milner Gibson here. He himself is popular with whores, CAB-DRIVERS, PUBLICANS, street urchins and the less respectable variety of philistine GENERALLY. While he was MAYOR the police left the whores in peace. Views—moderate liberal.

J. A. Turner is a respectable philistine who has never forgotten that he once went bankrupt and who, within his restricted circle, makes himself plus ou moins3 useful as chairman of the COMMERCIAL ASSOCIATION (the rival of the more liberal CHAMBER OF COMMERCE). Might also gain some influence in the House of Commons by his detailed knowledge of commercial questions. Is a Tory (moderate) and very rich. His elder son, Jack Turner, COMMONLY CALLED THE FAT BOY, is a great toper and a good billiards player. His second, an impudent lad, is a FOXHUNTER with considerable pretensions to good horse- manship, an ugly mug and red moustache. To the horror of his family, he married the ballet dancer Annie Payne.158

Your

F. E.

57

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 9 April 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

You must excuse me for being so late in answering. For a fortnight my wife has been in worse health than for many months

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a more or less





**[p. 119]**

past, and there has been great TROUBLE in the house. Be so good as to let me have Dana's letter back.

I am sending you through the parcels company a small bottle of eye lotion. Cornelius brought me a bottle of it from Paris, where he had had trouble with his eyes. For several weeks I had myself been suffering from inflammation of the eyes due to intensive work at night. The lotion put me right within a few days and will do you a similar service. All you have to do is put a few drops into the bad eye on getting up and on going to bed.

Conrad Schramm has died in Philadelphia of a chest complaint. I hear that in New York the Neue Zeit announcing his death has published an obituary of sorts. I haven't yet seen it.159

The apparent improvement on the Stock Exchanges is again petering out. Bank rate is rising again. Crédit mobilier45 and French rentes are again going DOWN, while revelations of commer- cial sharp practice by joint stock companies in London and Paris are becoming increasingly frequent. In the latter place, I'm glad to say, the government is directly involved. You have, I sup- pose, read about the row between Péreire and Féline? I'd have copied it out for you had I not assumed that The Manchester Guardian's [woman] correspondent CHRONICLES everything of that nature. I now see the Paris Figaro from time to time, the only real journal of the Empire; it has cast off all semblance of respectability.

I don't know whether I have already drawn your attention to the two new pieces of evidence against Pam. First, Herbert told his CONSTITUENTS in South Wilts3 that he had given orders for the bombardment of Odessa160; upon his resigning, Pam sent an order written with his own hand to SPARE it. Secondly, Russell told the City electorateb that Palmerston had given him written instructions on how to conduct himself at the Congress of Vienna,161

instructions which Clarendon forbade him to make public and in the execution of which LITTLE JOHN so splendidly BROKE DOWN. It's typical of old Pam to keep harping in his newspapers on Herbert's Odessa TREASON (it was Pam's popular rag, the Advertiser, that first drew attention to Herbert's family ties with Vorontsovc) and on Russell's Vienna TREASON.162

[^1]: a An account of S. Herbert's speech, delivered on 19 March, was published in The Times, No. 22633, 20 March 1857. - b An account of Russell's speech, delivered on 27 March, was published in The Times, No. 22640, 28 March 1857. - c 'The Sham Blockade of Russia', The Morning Advertiser, No. 19832, 12 January 1855.





**[p. 120]**

I shall search out more anti-Palmerstoniana for you. Pam's speech against Anstey (a fat pamphlet) ought to be in my possession if Pieper hasn't pinched it from me. Lengthier works are Parish, Diplomatic History of Greece and Urquhart, Central Asia.11 On the first topic you might also read the EXPOSITIONS by Thierschb and Maurenbrecher0 which came out in 1836 (?). (It's a long time since I set eyes on them.) Of all the Blue Books,38 the one that has impressed me most strongly is that on the second Syro-Turkish War.d

I've only had 5 articles in The Free Press.61 Liebknecht, etc., have filched them from me. However I'll get them together for you. In the last one I used the text of one of your articles, in which you speak of Peter I.16S I've only just completed the introduction. But at first the chaps dragged their feet for months. Later, they brought it out rather more quickly. But now, when the first payment is due, I dun them in vain. If they don't do better on this POINT than hitherto, I shall have to sever the CONNECTION ALTOGETHER. They have given me a new contract, but what good is a contract to me if they don't abide by it in puncto punctic?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Regards to Lupus. Tell him that in Grimmf I have found the scientific derivation of Farina, the Eau de Cologne manufacturer, viz. Sanscrit: vârig—Gen. vârinas.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published m English for the first Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, t i m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a Diplomatic Transactions in Central Asia - b Fr. Thiersch, De l'état actuel de la Grèce - c It has not been established which work by Maurenbrecher Marx had in mind. - d Correspondence 1839-1841, Relative to the Affairs of the East, and the Conflict Between Egypt and Turkey - e to the letter - f J. Grimm, Geschichte der deutschen Sprache. - g water



