---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "58. Engels to Jenny Marx. About 16 April "
Page_Range: "156-157"
---

# 58. Engels to Jenny Marx. About 16 April 



**[p. 1913]**

ENGELS T O JENNY MARX164

IN LONDON

[Manchester, about 16 April 1857]

Dear Mrs Marx,

Herewith the article," and at the same time 4 Guardians. A new map of London has now at last enabled me to locate your Grafton Terrace. You really are right out in the country, at the foot of Hampstead Hills and, if the hachures on the map are correct, in a highly romantic district. But if the result is nothing but ill-health, toothaches, swellings of the head and digestive upsets, it doesn't say much for country air and romanticism. At all events, I hope that both you and the Moor are by now feeling very much better.

Lupus suggests that the Moor's etymology of Farina is quite wrong and that the Sanscrit vârinas is, rather, the root of Varina shag.b This answer will certainly come as no surprise to the Moor and should therefore not be withheld from him. A new chapter is about to open in old Lupus' life. Don't be alarmed—it isn't marriage. On the contrary, it's divorce, for he's leaving the LANDLADY he's been with for 3 years, and moving closer to where I live. The old gent is now very popular with a group of German clerks who come to the Chatsworth from time to time, and over whom he presides with great dignity every Sunday night. They simply couldn't live without Lupus, any more than the English philistines who patronise the pub.

All eyes up here are fixed on fat Potter in anticipation of the day when he seconds the address in Parliament; a fine spectacle that will be!

Again, best wishes for your recovery. Warm regards to the girls—the air out there will undoubtedly suit them better. How they must have grown!

With warm regards,

Your

F. Engels

[^1]: Printed according to the original

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: b See previous letter.

[^4]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^5]: a F. Engels, 'Changes in the Russian Army'.



