---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "62. Marx to Engels. 8 May "
Page_Range: "163-164"
---

# 62. Marx to Engels. 8 May 



**[p. 62]**

MARX TO ENGELS20

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 May 1857

DEAR Frederick,

The £5 received.

Herewith a letter from Lassallea which, when Lupus has seen it, you should return to me at the beginning of next week. What should I do about fellow? Reply or not reply? You'll be amused by the comical vanity of the laddie, who will do anything to become famous and, entirely without provocation, writes 75 sheets on Greek philosophy.13

I have written to Dana in exactly the terms you suggested. As regards your Bazancourt,60 I had already urged him to return it. Steffen doesn't know of any book such as you require; he himself appears to be engaged on an English translation of Rüstow's Cäsars Heerwesen.

Pieper is on the point of falling back into his former foolishness. Has written me a 'genius's' letter. The enthusiasm—not the enthusiasm inspired in him by his new post, but that which he inspired in his new post cum attendant principal—appears AS ist ALLY to have waned. He wishes to go to Switzerland as a 'courier', or else sever connections with his principal at mid- summer and once again cut a dash in London with £20 in his pocket. When I next write I >hall pour cold water on the genius. If he is ever to become 'serviceable' again this young man must endure the parson's lash for some while yet.

Have you read the Crédit mobilier'*45 last report? It was in The Times S Indicates a DECLINE.

Pam AS REFORMER! He'll reform those boys WITH A VENGEANCE. If you possibly can, write a military piece on Persia or China next week. My wife is drawing ever closer to the catastrophe and is finding her secretarial duties increasingly onerous.

As regards your toothache, I would advise you to have recourse to the same means as I did after eighteen months' hesitation. Pull

[^1]: a Lassalle's letter to Marx of 26 April 1857 - b Lassalle's Die Philosophie Herakleilos des Dunklen von Ephesos, published later. - c 'The Credit Mobilier of France', The Times, No. 22670, 2 May 1857.



