---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "63. Engels to Marx. 11 May "
Page_Range: "164-165"
---

# 63. Engels to Marx. 11 May 



**[p. 129]**

the bugger out! I, too, always supposed my toothache to be rheumatic. Yet in the end a corpus delicti was discovered after all. When are you coming down here?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

With the coming of spring the children always go down with various ailments. So it has been again, first the youngest3 and Laura and now it's little Jenny's turn.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

63

ENGELS T O MARX

[Manchester,] Monday, 11 May 1857

My dear Moor,

I return Lassalle's letter herewith. Effery eench the puerile Jew. What a pretty compilation it must be, likewise the thing that is going to 'set things alight' and about which he is so mysterious.168

We know, of course, that there is nothing to the fellow but it is difficult to find any positive reason for breaking with him, particularly as we have heard nothing further from the Düsseldorf workers.b From this letter he would appear to have ceased all intercourse with them, or rather they with him, since he finds nothing positive to say about how things are going with the workers in Germany. But whether he wouldn't again make use of a letter from you to regain some kudos in their eyes is another matter. In your place I should write to him—you can't very well do otherwise—but ask him outright how things stand with the workers' movement on the Rhine and especially in Düsseldorf, so

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Eleanor Marx - b See this volume, pp. 24-25.



