---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "64. Engels to Marx. 20 May "
Page_Range: "165-167"
---

# 64. Engels to Marx. 20 May 



**[p. 130]**

working your letter that he will keep his mouth shut about it and must either plus ou moins* declare himself or be deterred from corresponding with you. Lupus was much amused by the letter but our discussion on the subject was interrupted. I should, by the way, also make a point of asking him how he comes to slip your letters into the hands of the police.

There is absolutely nothing to say about Persia; the campaign itself was rotten and the accounts are even more so. There was, of course, something to be said about China on the arrival of the last MAIL as there still is, but now, ten days after the last MAIL, it's too late to do anything. So I shall wait until the next MAIL arrives, when I shall at once set to work so that the articleb will reach you in time for Friday or the following Tuesday. As far as possible, then, make your arrangements accordingly. I think the MAIL arrives at the end of this week.

WHAT'S THE MATTER WITH THE CHILDREN? I trust little Jenny is ALL RIGHT again. Warm regards to them all and also to your wife.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . , , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

64

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 20 May 1857

Dear Marx,

As you will no doubt see from the enclosed article,1 it was written UNDER DIFFICULTIES. Each time I propose to do a Tribune article, it seems to bring out all the evil humours latent in my frame. On this occasion I'm sitting at home with linseed poultices on the left-hand side of my face in the hope of getting the better

[^1]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a more or less - b F. Engels, 'Persia—China'.





**[p. 131]**

of a nasty abscess; I've been put on a frugal diet and forbidden beer, but by good fortune ordered to take a glass of wine. It's alleged that I've been eating too much roast beef; at all events I have had continual trouble with my face for the past month—first toothache, then a swollen cheek, then more toothache and now the whole thing has blossomed out into a furuncle, as little Heckscher calls it. In addition, I have to drink mineral water and—great fun, this—go out at 7 o'clock each morning.

Everyone up here is an art lover just now and the talk is all of the pictures at the exhibition. The thing is proving plus ou moins3

a FAILURE, financially, at any rate. Admittedly there are some very fine pictures, though most of those by the better or very best artists are no more than SECOND-RATE. Among the finest is a magnificent portrait of Ariosto by Titian. The later German and French schools very poor, hardly represented at all. Three- quarters consists of English trash. Best represented are the Spanish and Flemish and, after them, the Italians. S'il y a moyen? you and your wife ought to come up this summer and see the thing. It wouldn't do to write about it for the Tribune; and I wouldn't know where to begin—the Tribune can find the usual chit-chat in any paper.

Lupus, as I believe I told you, has moved out and is again fighting the good fight with his LANDLADY. To make matters worse, his new LANDLADY was brought to bed a week after he moved in. Next door there's a chap who not only has a fiddle which he plays badly but also a French horn which he plays completely out of tune. Hence the study of the pedagogic sciences is attended by enormous difficulties, so that the old chap is spending more time than usual at the Chatsworth.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: I shall be in London in a fortnight or 3 weeks' time, either during Whitsuntide or the week after.169

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a more or less - b If possible



