---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "66. Marx to Engels. 23 May "
Page_Range: "169-170"
---

# 66. Marx to Engels. 23 May 



**[p. 134]**

I have omitted only one or two small items from your China-Persia article,3 and altered an expression here and there. I agree with the whole thing, only I don't think that the troops stationed in Persia will be sent to China so soon. The treaty expressly stipulates that they will not leave Persia until the Persians evacuate Herat.129 Pam won't spare them the hot season. That his instructions in this respect were again highly 'incomprehensible' would seem to follow from the fact that the Governor-General of India—Canning—tendered his resignation at the same time as the British general and the British admiralb committed suicide. Meanwhile, as announced in the Vienna newspapers, the main object has been attained. Persia has ceded two STRIPS OF LAND to Russia.

I have heard from Mickelc and shall send you his letter one of these days. Trusting I shall soon hear that you are fit and well again.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, f l r s t t I m e

66

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 23 May 1857

Dear Engels,

The enclosed arrived from Dana this morning. It puzzles me how the Yankee can expect the stuff for Vol. I to be in New York by the beginning of July if he doesn't let us know what he wants until the end of May.

[^1]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'Persia—China'. - b Stalker and Etheridge - c Johannes Miquel



