---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "67. Engels to Marx. 28 May "
Page_Range: "170-172"
---

# 67. Engels to Marx. 28 May 



**[p. 135]**

You might reconsider which articles one should offer to do, apart from the military. Philosophical stuff is, in fact, too badly paid and also difficult when it has TO BE DONE IN ENGLISH. Do you know if there happens to be any German or French book on the biographies of big industrialists?

I'm equally puzzled as to how aesthetics is to be dealt with in 1 PAGE, FUNDAMENTALLY, and on a Hegelian basis.

Does Lupus feel inclined to take something on? Enclosed also a letter from Miquel. I do not, in fact, understand his theory of 'non-overproduction' and yet of 'lack of the wherewith to pay for production', unless it be that the utterly superficial blather of the utterly wretched CURRENCY chaps1S2 has taken root in Germany.

Saint

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

67

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 28 May 1857

Dear Marx,

Dana must be out of his mind to stipulate 1 page for aesthetics. Nor has the chap any inkling of military matters. See list of articles overleaf, occurring to me exclusively from Brockhaus and from memory. But since I must first check it against an English military encyclopaedia it can't be final; how could anyone remember all the technical expressions which in English begin with A? Apropos, there is an encyclopaedia of this kind by a hack of the most wretched variety, one J. H. Stocqueler.3 Could you make inquiries about price, scope, etc., etc.?

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a ]. H. Stocqueler, The Military Encyclopaedia.





**[p. 2]**

And then, if you please, he wants to have the articles—of the desired thoroughness and brevity—over there by 1 July. Once again, typical Yankee. Anyway, it proves that they are counting more on SHOW than on real substance, as is already evident from the $2 per page.

Send Dana the list—as a provisional one—and point out that since it's impossible to work ON SPECULATION at this PAY, he must say what he wants. (It's precisely these patched together articles, being the easiest, that make the PAY acceptable.) A 2nd list of technical expressions for A will follow very shortly. Once this is SETTLED he might just as well let us have the list up to D, E or G so that we can get on with it.

I know nothing about Airey's (General) former career. You might look it up in an ARMY LIST, which will at least provide the bare bones.

I know nothing about the Spanish Armada either, but this could be found—likewise Ayacucho.

I'm not yet in sufficiently good shape to be able to come up tomorrow, and propose to leave on Saturday.169 Can one take a CAB from Camden STATION (to which one books the TICKETS) to your place? And how far is it?

I shall bring Miquel's letter with me; because of my illness I haven't seen Lupus for a whole week.

More when we meet. As you can imagine, I have my hands really full, what with arrears, etc., etc.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: «Abensberg (battle of 1809) V4 p. Abukir ditto V4 p. Axle (artillery) '/g ditto Acre (St. Jean-d'-Sièges of) V4 ditto à V2 Actium (battle of) ]!»-l U Adjutant V4-V2 Afghanistan (invasion by English) Aland Isles see Bomarsund Albuera (battle) 1/4 Aldenhoven ditto 1797 >/4 Alessandria (fortress and sieges) V4 Algeria (French conquest of and English

[^2]: bombardment of) 2-3 Almeida (siege of in Peninsular War) l/4 Amusette (artillery) 1/10



