---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "68. Engels to Marx. 5 June "
Page_Range: "172-173"
---

# 68. Engels to Marx. 5 June 



**[p. I]**

Anglesey (Marquis of) V2 Attack (in battle and siege) V2 Antwerp (fortress & sieges) Approaches V2 fully Arbela (battle of) 'A, Arquebusier Vs Aspern and Essling (battle 1809) 3/4 Augereau (Marshal) V2 Advanced guard V2* " 2

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx-Engels time Gesamtausgabe, Abt. Ill, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930

68

ENGELS TO MARX173

IN LONDON

[London,] Friday morning [5 June 1857]

Dear Moor,

Instead of coming to see you I am once more condemned to no less than four days of hot poultices. My face is again very bad and the whole business has begun all over again. But this time I intend to get rid of it for good. This will, of course, postpone my departure for Manchester ad infinitum. If the thing clears up quickly I might be able to go out for a bit on Monday.

In case you have any news for me in the meantime, drop me a line. The address you know: 7 Grove Hill, Camberwell.

I am RATHER annoyed by this business, as you can imagine, but que fairea?

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII. Moscow, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: 11 what can be done?



