---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "75. Marx to Engels. 6 July "
Page_Range: "176-178"
---

# 75. Marx to Engels. 6 July 



**[p. 141]**

may well have got lost. I couldn't go to Williams' since my wife's condition has meant—pretty well ever since you left169—that I can't leave her on her own.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

74

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 July [18571

DEAR Frederic,

I am writing again TO GAINSAY my earlier note. No. II arrived on the stroke of 6. No letter has ever arrived so late before, and hence I wrote in order to avert possible MISCHIEF.

Salut. ., Your

K. M.

75

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 6 July 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maidand Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Engels,

Rüstow3 is not to be had at Williams'. And I wouldn't care to write to Steffen on this score for, being himself engaged on an

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: W. Rüstow, Heerwesen und Kriegführung C. Julius Cäsars.





**[p. 142]**

English rendering of the book, he tends to be mistrustful. So far as the ancient world is concerned, I believe you could restrict yourself to a few generalities and simply say—in the article itselfa—that these themes are to be discussed under the headings 'Greek Army' and 'Roman Army'.This will save time,during which it will be possible not only to procure Rüstow but also to send you a mass of other data, for I have now discovered at the Museum,b

after prolonged searching, a complete list of sources on the military history of Antiquity. But at the moment speed is the main consideration. As you know, I took your advice and sent Dana a second list.177 So what excuse can I offer the man? I cannot plead illness, for if I do I shall have to interrupt my writing for the Tribune altogether and so reduce to nothing my already exiguous income. At a pinch Dana could have recourse to the man who already provides him with some of the military articles. In which case I would be elbowed out. To obviate this I shall have to write on Friday. But the difficulty is, what?

As you will understand, nothing could be more distasteful to me than TO PRESS UPON YOU while you are ill; nor, indeed, when you left here did I have any inkling that, in the state you are in, you would at once resume—and so SERIOUSLY at that—your work in the office.

My own situation is such that everything depends on whether I can persuade little Bamberger to discount a bill on myself this week. The end of the quarter has come, and all hell will now be let loose.

Freiligrath has written me a note from which I can see the Crédit mobilier's scare.45 The constant fall in securities on the Paris Bourse, despite the prospect of a good harvest, has given rise to a veritable PANIC amongst the financiers.

The Indian affair is delicious.178 Mazzini's putsch quite in the old official style.179 The ass might at least have avoided dragging in Genoa!

Salut. .. Your

[^1]: K. M. There is a cheap Dictionary of Military Science by Campbell. First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a A reference to the article 'Army' for The New American Cyclopaedia. - b the British Museum Library



