---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "80. Marx to Engels. 16 July Ł "
Page_Range: "182-183"
---

# 80. Marx to Engels. 16 July Ł 



**[p. 147]**

making bogus rendezvous at which he never appears. I shall now give the laddie up, of course.

Jones' wife died last April; he seems to be keeping relatively well.

A letter received from Imandt today. He has the EXPECTATION of a post which he puts at £300 a year. Regarding Dronke he tells me that he is said to be living en famille with a woman who is pregnant by him. It isn't Miss Smith, however.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

80

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 16 July 1857

Dear Frederic,

I have today sent you the Rüstow," which you should return as soon as possible, since Steffen is working on it just now. I told him I wanted it for myself.

The enclosed notes are of little value, EXCEPT PERHAPS for a quotation or two.180 I did, in fact, take a look at the Encyclopaedia

Britannica but there was no time to read it properly. I fear that the notes will contain little that is new to you. Were taken from: Ersch and Gruber: Encyclopédie universelle^ ; Pauly: Realencyclopädie der classischen Alterthumswissenschaft (1844-52). Impossible for me to read the works themselves just now. Pity I didn't apply myself to them sooner. The Encyclopaedia Britannica seems to have been

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a W. Rüstow, Heerwesen und Kriegführung C. Julius Cäsars. - b This probably refers to the French translation of Allgemeine Encyclopädie der Wissenschaften und Künste herausgegeben von J. S. Ersch und J. G. Gruber.



