---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "81. Marx to Engels. 24 July "
Page_Range: "183-184"
---

# 81. Marx to Engels. 24 July 



**[p. 148]**

My wife better physically; however still in bed; also extraordi- narily out of temper for which, au fond de coeur3 and UNDER PRESENT AUSPICES, I don't blame her though I find it wearisome.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I trust your health keeps improving.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K, Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, j g j j Published in English for the first time

81

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 July 1857

Dear Engels,

Received the Cyclopaedia stuff To-DAY.b181

If at all possible will you send me some money? On Monday I'm threatened with the BROKER on account of rates and LANDLORD. Besides this the total WANT OF CASH during the past fortnight has made it impossible to obtain the small COMFORTS the doctor has prescribed for my wife, whose RECOVERY is very slow—indeed, she would seem to be getting weaker every day.

During this time I have been trying with conspicuous lack of success either to discount a bill or, as is quite customary in London, to raise a LOAN from a LOAN SOCIETY.182 The latter operation calls for two respectable guarantors and my attempts to find them have been a total failure.

The money outstanding to me from the Tribune is so insignificant that I cannot think of drawing a bill on them for

[^1]: a at the bottom of my heart - b Engels' articles 'Arbela', 'Arquebuse', 'Aspern', 'Airey' and 'Attack'.



