---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "82. Engels to Marx. 29 July "
Page_Range: "184-185"
---

# 82. Engels to Marx. 29 July 



**[p. 149]**

another 2 weeks. It would have been more if, on the one hand, I hadn't been previously compelled to overdraw and, on the other, the troubles at home had not caused some loss of earnings.

Nothing could be more distasteful to me than to burden you with my woes during your illness, but I'm so completely isolated that there is nothing else I can do.

I trust that, at the seaside, you will soon recuperate. Don't forget to let me have your address straight away.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Have attended to the enclosed letter for Imandt.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

82

ENGELS TO MARX

Waterloo near Liverpool, 29 July3 (Wednesday) 1857

Dear Marx,

Hefe I am at last at the seaside, where I have been since the evening of the day before yesterday.183 It's 3 miles beyond New Brighton, but to the north of the Mersey. Unfortunately I arrived with a raging cold which has temporarily aggravated the glandular trouble, caused me a great deal of pain and spoilt my sleep. The worst of it is that for a day or two I shall be pretty well incapable of work, my daily report for Heckscher and other such unavoidable notes being as much as I can manage. In the evening I'm in such intense pain and so enervated that up till now I haven't even been able to read. That this damned thing should have had to happen now! Thus, since Friday evening or Saturday morning all my time has been wasted first by interruptions, then

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: •' wrong dale in the original: 30 July



