---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "83. Marx to Engels. 9 August "
Page_Range: "185-186"
---

# 83. Marx to Engels. 9 August 



**[p. 150]**

I had a hamper of wine sent to you from Manchester which will do your wife good: 6 bottles of Bordeaux, 3 of port, 3 of sherry. It should be there by now if the thing was properly attended to. Let me know the colour of the seals on the port and sherry so that I can keep a check on my wine merchant. Sherry ought to be yellow, port, I think, green. The Bordeaux bears the label Co. Destournel; I have just imported it.

You will have the militaria" as soon as at all possible. Unfortunately I don't know whether the post reaches London in 1 day; I shall only discover that from experience within the next few days.

I hope that the sea air will soon make me fit again for the usual drudgery. As things are now, I'm bored to death.

Warmest regards to your wife and daughters.

Your

F. E.

You'll have received the £5 note.

Address: F. E., care of Mr Swingwood, Bath St., Waterloo near Liverpool

83

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 9 August 1857

Dear Engels,

Today I am prevented from writing more than a few lines— just my best wishes for your recovery. My ANXIETY for your

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN WATERLOO NEAR LIVERPOOL

[^3]: a Articles on military matters for The American Cyclopaedia

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



