---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "87. Marx to Engels. 26 August "
Page_Range: "193-195"
---

# 87. Marx to Engels. 26 August 



**[p. 158]**

in which case I shall at once go to Manchester and then, within a few days, to a more bracing seaside resort, possibly the Isle of Man. So write to Manchester in the meantime. As soon as I'm completely recovered and no longer require such regular sea- bathing I intend to take a sea trip, probably by STEAMER via Dublin to Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, where we could hold a council of war together. But that will depend on circum- stances.

'Army' is making progress; Antiquity is done, Middle Ages will be short and then modern times. However, Antiquity alone will run to 6 or 7 pages; I shall have to see what further deletions can be made. But we can't be bound too strictly by Mr Dana's conditions. It won't be possible to let you have the thing by Friday because of the disruption caused by my old man—but by Tuesday, I hope. Apropos, hasn't Dana said anything at all about the manuscripts or the list for B? Why, I wonder? It would certainly be curious if one were not to hear anything at all from him. Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

MARX TO ENGELS

| London,] 26 August 1857

Dear Engels,

Herewith a note for you from Schramm. Drop him a line or two. I don't suppose there's much hope for him now.188

Lupus' adventure most amusing. Why not go to Hastings, which is famed for its efficacy in cases like yours. It's the only specific watering-place of the kind in England. The Isle of Man, in so far as I had the pleasure of

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER





**[p. 159]**

The situation in regard to Dana is a little awkward. During the acute phase of your illness I thought it ^inopportune to keep you informed of the details of the affair. It was quite some time ago that Dana sent me the enclosed B list (in which there are only two non-military articles, 'Blum' and 'Bourrienne'). On the same occasion he said that the sooner they got the contributions to the ensuing volumes, the better they would be pleased, while I, for my part, could always receive my fee immediately after sending in the articles. But what was I to do, at a time when the contributions to A could not be sent off, and any failure to respond to so urgent a request—on terms so favourable to myself—would inevitably have aroused suspicion? My only recourse was to refrain for a time from writing to New York, and then do so only at longish intervals—SAY, EVERY FORTNIGHT—so that later on it would still be open to me to tell them with some plausibility that domestic TROUBLES and my own indisposition had made any sort of writing very difficult for me, as the paucity of my contributions to the papera also went to show. To send your B list to Dana in such circumstances would have been QUITE inexpedient and would have placed me in an even more invidious position. In the meantime I had also learned that Major Ripleyb had become co-editor of the Tribune, so that in case of need Dana had a pis allerc for the Cyclopaedia.

WELL, on 24 July I despatched your first pieces.181 August was nearly upon us and your condition seemed to have deteriorated again. On 11 August another package arrived from you.d Instinct warned me that a letter from New York was now imminent and would place me in something of a quandary since your illness meant that it was OUT OF ITHE] QUESTION to speed up the work. So in order to leave a loophole for myself, I sent the package off to Dana together with a letter189 in which I 1. informed him that the BULK of the contributions had gone off on 7 August (to make him think the manuscript had gone astray), at the same time telling him that the tardiness and delay were due to an indisposition which had not yet quite SUBSIDED. I took this step because it covered any eventuality. Thus, when Dana protests (probably at the begin- ning of September) the manuscript for A either will or will not be ready. In the first case, he either will or will not still be

[^1]: 3 New-York Daily Tribune - b Marx seems mistakenly to identify George Ripley, editor of The New American Cyclopaedia, with the military writer Roswell Sabine Ripley. - c stop-gap - d the articles 'Abatis' and 'Afghanistan'

[^2]: 7*



