---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "88. Engels to Marx. 8 September "
Page_Range: "195-197"
---

# 88. Engels to Marx. 8 September 



**[p. 160]**

On 17 August" I received the enclosed letter from Dana. As regards B, there can now be no question of adding to the list; rather, it must be polished off as quickly as possible. Otherwise we'll have to abandon the whole thing.

As a result my economic position has become completely untenable and even my position on the Tribune has grown precarious.

Be so good as to return the plan of Delhi and write and let me know what you think of the INDIAN AFFAIR.b

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

88

ENGELS TO MARX

Ryde, Isle of Wight, 8 September 1857 Kelston Cottage, Trinity St.

Dear Marx,

I finally arrived today at my new lodgings 183 in the middle of a frightful downpour and tomorrow shall at once get down to the army again. Yesterday in Portsmouth I noted what was worth seeing on the military side, so all that now remains is the navy, which at this moment looks distinctly sparse. My health continues good and if the weather improves I hope I shall soon be completely cured. It takes half an hour to get here from Portsmouth and it's a

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a April in the original - b See this volume, p. 152.





**[p. 161]**

very aristocratic little spot, though lodgings are not as dear as in Waterloo. At the end of the week I shall doubtless know what the situation is as regards food. However the hotels, etc., etc., are scandalously expensive.

In Portsmouth one might almost be at home in Germany. One is barely aware of the NAVY in the town, which, by contrast, is lorded over by the subaltern—the false dignity, the affectation of reserve and the strangulated English that go to make up your OFFICER AND GENTLEMAN. Moreover, almost everyone goes around in uniform. I watched the 47th Regiment drilling, all of them bemedalled veterans of the Crimea,3 newly arrived from the Mediterranean. The more simple evolutions were passable but the intricate 'model' manoeuvres, of which there are so many in the English manual, were carried out very shakily. Square formation from marching in open order, each file proceeding diagonally, thus /////, was botched completely and the most hellish confusion arose. By contrast the march past in line, with the entire battalion deployed, was very well done. The commanding officer was very calm but as with us there was cursing and swearing within the companies. All movements were executed at the same gait as ours, somewhat longer paces perhaps, but performed rapidly though with great nonchalance on the part of individual men. A Prussian lieutenant's comment would be: The chaps lack drill. Still very poor at the double. Shoot as though half-asleep. Conclusion: Manual rotten, men better than manual. So far little learnt from the French in the Crimea. The moderri stuff either not introduced at all or else rottenly done.

I shall send you 'Army' as soon as it is finished. Warmest regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jqio Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a i.e. of the Crimean war of 1853-56 waged by Britain, France, Sardinia and Turkey against Russia



