---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Marx. 10 September "
Page_Range: "197-199"
---

# 89. Engels to Marx. 10 September 



**[p. 89]**

ENGELS TO MARX190

IN LONDON

[Ryde,] 10 September [1857,] Thursday

Dear Marx,

Herewith 'Bennigsen' and 'Barclay'." I am taking a closer look at the Napoleonic generals, who will follow tomorrow or the day after. 'Army' ready shortly.

Your

F. E.

All that I know about Bennigsen is that in 1807, at the beginning of the campaign under Kamenski, he commanded the First Army (there were 2 of them, the 2nd under Buxhövden); on 26 December 1806, he was attacked by Lannes near Pultusk and, having the superiority in numbers, he held out (because Napoleon attacked the other army with the main force) and then, assuming himself to be the victor, wanted to attack in strength. He was soon given the supreme command and attacked Napoleon's winter quarters at the end of January 1807; was soon pressed hard and by mere chance evaded the trap which Napoleon had set for him; he fought at Eylau on 7 and 8 February. On the 7th Napoleon captured Eylau (Barclay de Tolly, who directed the defence, distinguishing himself), and on the 8th the main engagement took place, Bennigsen being obliged to give battle in order to evade hot pursuit by Napoleon, and being saved from total defeat only by the toughness of his troops, the arrival of the Prussians under Lestock and the slowness with which Napoleon's individual corps appeared on the battlefield. In the spring Bennigsen entrenched himself at Heilsberg, because he was the weaker; he did not attack Napoleon while part of the French army was absent, engaged in the siege of Danzig192; but when Danzig had fallen and the French army was united, he attacked (!), let himself be held up by Napoleon's vanguard, which had only '/a the strength he had, and then be manoeuvred back into his entrenched camp by Napoleon. This Napoleon attacked without success on 10 [June]

[^1]: a The material that follows was used by Marx and Engels in their articles 'Bennigsen' and 'Barclay de Tolly'.





**[p. 163]**

'avait fait fautes sur fautes dans cette journée il y eut dans sa conduite un mélange d'imprudence téméraire et d'irrésolution'.c

In 1812 he followed Russian headquarters around inveighing against Barclay in order to get his place, intriguing against him until Alexander relieved Bennigsen of his post. In 1813 he was ordered to lead the reserve army out of Russia into Bohemia, and when it arrived it was disbanded and Bennigsen disappeared.

Barclay de Tolly commanded a brigade at Eylau, etc. (see above); in 1812 commanded the First West Army and was War Minister; after Alexander's departure until Kutuzov's arrival was General-in-Chief, directed the retreat of the Russian army skilfully and had the great merit of resisting the clamourous demands of the Russians and of the whole headquarters to give battle. When he had to fight, as at Smolensk, he took up such a position that hë could not be involved in a decisive battle,193 and when this could no longer be avoided—shortly before Moscow—he selected a position by Gzhatsk which was almost impregnable from the front and could be bypassed only by a very big detour. The army had already occupied this position when Kutuzov arrived, and natural- ly he would not agree to it because it was not he who had chosen it, and so the Russians had to fight in the unfavourable position at

[^1]: a 'A robbers' den into which Bennigsen has ventured' (A. H. Jomini, Vie politique et militaire de Napoléon, t. 2, p. 414). - b 14 June 1807 - c 'committed mistake after mistake on that day his conduct was a mixture of rash imprudence and irresolution' (A. H. Jomini, op. cit., t. 2, p. 421).



