---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "90. Engels to Marx. 11 or 12 September "
Page_Range: "199-203"
---

# 90. Engels to Marx. 11 or 12 September 



**[p. 164]**

First published: the first paragraph in: Printed according to the original Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929; the Published in English for the first rest of the text in: Marx and Engels, time Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 44, Moscow, 1977

90

ENGELS TO MARX196

IN LONDON

[Ryde, 11 or 12 September 1857]

[] Berthier was a mere CLERK without an idea in his head, but frightfully zealous in the service and punctilious; when Napoleon sent him to Bavaria in 1809 to organise the troops before his own arrival, his ordres et contreordresb split the army into three. Half of it was with Davout at Regensburg, the remainder with Masséna at Augsburg, and the Bavarians in between at Abensberg, so that a rapid advance by Archduke Charles would have enabled him to defeat the various corps one by one. It was only Napoleon's arrival and the slowness of the Austrians that saved the French.

In 1813 Bernadotte was not a general at all but a diplomat. He prevented the generals under him from attacking and when, in contravention of this order, Bülow won his two victories at Grossbeeren and Dennewitz,197 Bernadotte stopped the pursuit. He was in constant touch with the French. When Blücher marched to the Elbe to join up with him and to force him at last to act, he continued to prevaricate until Sir Ch. Stewart (the English commissary in his camp) told him that if he didn't march immediately, he wouldn't pay out another penny. This helped—

[^1]: a common sense - b An allusion to Napoleon's words 'ordre, contreordre, désordre'.



LET THE MATTER DROP.a [] [] Jomini, Vie politique et militaire de Napoléon, t. II, p. 60 qq. (Napoleon says)b

'Bernadotte un homme fin, d'un extérieur brillant; les plans d'opération qu'il avait faits comme ministre de la guerre, prouvaient qu'il était meilleur lieutenant, que général en chef'c [p. 60].

'Marmont, jadis mon aide de camp et officier d'artillerie' [pp. 60-61]. 'Davout, qui avait reçu une bonne éducation, avait la tête fortement organisée et des idées de guerre très justes. Ses manières rudes et un caractère à la fois soupçonneux et dur lui ont fait beaucoup d'ennemis, et dans les graves circonstances où il s'est trouvé, l'esprit de parti s'est déchaîné contre lui avec une grande injustice. Sévère, mais juste envers ses subordonnés, mieux qu'aucun autre il sut maintenir la discipline parmi ses soldats; aucun de mes maréchaux n'exigeait plus de ses subordonnés, et aucun ne les fit servir avec tant d'exactitude' [p. 61'].

'Soult, d'un physique mâle, d'un esprit étendu, laborieux, actif, infatigable, avait fait preuve de talents supérieurs' [p. 61].

'Lannes; couvert de gloire et de blessures, ce brave manquait de principes faits sur la guerre; mais il y suppléait par un jugement admirable et sur le champ de bataille il ne le cédait à aucun de ses collègues' [p. 61].

[^1]: 'Ney. Lannes fut peut être aussi brillant que lui dans maintes attaques; mais la force d'âme que Ney déploya dans le grand désastre de 1812 où il commanda successivement tous les corps de l'armée, lui assigne le premier rang parmi les braves de tous les jours. De même que plusieurs de ses collègues il n'entendait point la guerre en grand sur la cartel; mais sur le terrain, rien n'égalait son assurance, son coup d'oeil et son aplomb' [p. 62].

[^2]: 'Murât, qui avait dû à sa bonne mine, à son courage et à son activité l'honneur d'être mon aide de camp et mon beau-frère, n'a jamais été à la hauteur de la réputation colossale que je lui avais faite. Du reste, il avait de l'esprit naturel, un courage brillant et une grande activité' [p. 63],

[^3]: 'Masséna reçut de la nature tout ce qui fait un excellent homme de guerre, doué d'un grand caractère, d'un courage éprouvé et d'un coup d'oeil qui inspirait les résolutions les plus promptes et les plus heureuses, on ne peut lui refuser une place distinguée parmi les capitaines modernes. Cependant il faut avouer qu'il brillait plus dans les combats que dans le conseil' [p. 63].

[^4]: 'Brune ne manquait pas de certain mérite, c'était pourtant pour tout prendre un général de tribune bien plus qu'un militaire redoutable'e [p. 64],

[^5]: a The relevant passages were used by Marx in his articles 'Berthier' and 'Bernadotte'. The facts connected with Bernadotte's diplomatic mission in Vienna are here distorted (see also this volume, pp. 169-70). - b Engels condenses some of the quotations from Jomini's book. - c Used by Marx in his article 'Bernadotte'. - d Here and below Engels' italics. - e Used by Marx in his article 'Brune'.





**[p. 166]**

'Bessières avait fait ses preuves près de moi à l'armée d'Italie où il commandait mes guides à cheval. Il n'avait pour lui qu'un grand esprit d'ordre et une valeur reconnue. Il était méthodique et d'une timidité exessive dans le conseil' [p. 64].

'Lefebvre, duc de Dantzic, était un vrai grenadier. Enfant de la nature, il ne devait rien qu'à son esprit naturel, à une grande bravoure, et à un caractère simple et naif. Il savait se faire aimer du soldat et le mener droit à une position; c'était tout son mérite' [p. 64].

'Jourdan avait dû à la fortune une grande partie de sa réputation. Bon administrateur, laborieux, homme d'ordre et intègre. Et ayant de l'instruction, il eût été fort bon chef d'état major d'une grande armée sous un chef qui l'eut bien dirigé' [p. 64].

'Macdonald avait fort mal manoeuvré à la Trebbia' []» [p. 65].

Berthier is not mentioned in this collection. Apropos: what about your material on Bern? Of him it must be said that he excelled in command of smaller corps of 5-10,000 men and could inspire younger troops with self-assurance by good

a 'Bernadotte a man of refinement, of brilliant appearance; the plans of operations which he drew up in his capacity as War Minister proved him to be better as a subaltern than as a general-in-chief (p. 60).

'Marmont, formerly my ADC and artillery officer' (pp. 60-61). 'Davout, who had a good education, possessed a well-organised brain and very correct ideas about war. His rough ways and a disposition at once suspicious and harsh earned him many enemies, and in the grave circumstances in which he found himself the spirit of prejudice broke loose against him with great injustice. Severe but fair towards his subordinates, he knew better than anyone else how to maintain discipline among his men; not one of my marshals demanded so much of his subordinates, and not one of them induced them to serve with such punctiliousness' (p. 61).

[^1]: 'Soult, with his manly build, his broad, hard-working, active and untiring mind, had demonstrated superior talents' (p. 61).

[^2]: 'Lannes; covered with glory and with wounds, this brave man lacked set principles concerning war; but he made up for this with his admirable judgment, and on the battlefield he was second to none of his colleagues' (p. 61).

[^3]: 'Ney. Lannes was perhaps as brilliant as he in many an attack; but the fortitude which Ney displayed in the great disaster of 1812, when he commanded all the corps of the army in succession, ranks him first among the brave men of all times. Like many of his colleagues, he understood nothing about war on a large scale on the map; but on the ground his assurance, his sharpsightedness and his poise were unequalled' (p. 62).

[^4]: 'Murat, who was indebted to his good looks, his courage and his activity for the honour of being my ADC and my brother-in-law, never lived up to the colossal reputation which I had made for him. For the rest, he had a natural wit, brilliant courage and great energy' (p. 63).

[^5]: ' Masséna received from nature all that goes to make an excellent soldier, endowed with a splendid character, a courage which stood the test and a sharpsightedness which inspired the most prompt and most felicitous decisions; he cannot be denied a distinguished place among the captains of our time. But it must be admitted that he shone more in battle than at the council table' (p. 63).





**[p. 167]**



[^1]: 'Brune was not without a certain merit, but all considered, he was a tribune general rather than a formidable soldier' (p. 64).

[^2]: 'Mortier, less brilliant, was however more reliable; his calm and sangfroid,which became proverbial among his soldiers, won him success more than once, and he was one of those who could lead a corps under my direction' (p. 64).

[^3]: 'Bessières had proved his worth with me in the army of Italy, in which he commanded my mounted guides. All he had to distinguish him was a great spirit of order and a recognised valour. He was methodical and excessively timid at the council table' (p. 64).

[^4]: 'Lefebvre, Duke of Danzig, was a true grenadier. A child of nature, he owed everything to his natural wit, to his great bravery and his straightforward, naive character. He knew how to win the soldiers' love and lead them straight into action; that was where his merit lay' (p. 64).

[^5]: 'Jourdan owed much of his reputation to fortune. A good administrator, hard-working, a man of order and integrity. And had he had training, he would have made a very good chief of staff of a great army under a commander who directed him well' (p. 64).

[^6]: 'Macdonald manoeuvred very badly at La Trebbia' (p. 65). a stamp



