---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "91. Marx to Engels. 15 September "
Page_Range: "203-204"
---

# 91. Marx to Engels. 15 September 



**[p. 168]**

[] Can you find out what Bockbrücken (ponts à chevaletsb) are in English? I should also like to have a description of the Austrian Birago pontoons and a brief excerpt—merely an outline—on the design of pontoons in the various armies (SEE Sir Howard Douglas, Military Bridges), also whether the Russians and Prussians still have canvas pontoons. I have no material here, and such as I have in Manchester is very old. I have something on English pontoons [].

First published abridged in: Marx and Printed according to the original Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow, 1962 Published in English for the first time Published in this form for the first time

91

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RYDE

[London,] 15 September [1857]

Dear Engels,

You must excuse my silence and non-ACKNow LEDGMENT of your various packages, due firstly to a great deal of work and secondly to numerous time-consuming errands in which 'inner compulsion' played no part whatever. I trust your health continues to improve despite the bad weather, and have still not abandoned the NOTION that you will be taking iron in the end. Only I'm afraid all this writing may be harmful to you.

I expect a letter from Dana on Friday. Today I sent him 'Barclay', 'Berthier', 'Blum', 'Bourrienne' and your contribu- tions.0 It is important that I should send off the 2nd lot of B's next week. I have certain queries to put to you in my next about the

[^1]: a Engels' description of Bern was partly reproduced in the article 'Bern' by Marx and Engels. - b trestle-bridges - c 'Barbette', 'Bastion' and 'Bayonet'



