---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "92. Marx to Engels. 17September "
Page_Range: "204-206"
---

# 92. Marx to Engels. 17September 



**[p. 169]**

Distinguished himself at the battle of Iganin, when he engaged 40 Russian heavy calibre cannon with 12 light and 4 heavy guns, and subsequently at the battle of Ostrolenka.203 Here he galloped his battery up to the line of Russian skirmishers, subjected the detachments which had crossed the Narev to devastating fire, withstood a hail of shot from 80 guns, and forced the enemy to withdraw. After this engagement promoted to colonel, shortly afterwards to command of the entire artillery and, when the Polish forces were concentrating at Warsaw, to general. During 5 and 6 September Bern committed all his guns to battle, siting his field pieces between the separate defensive works of the outer line. On the 6th, he advanced with 40 guns until he was just below Wola, already in Russian hands, but, having neither infantry nor cavalry in support, was compelled to retire. When the Polish army fell back on Praga during the night of the 7th, he occupied the bridge with 40 guns. On the morning of the 8th, however, he was informed of the agreement made with the Russians and of Malachowski's order to proceed with the artillery to Modlin. Cf. his memoir, Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung, 1831, in which he discusses recent developments and attacks Krukowiecki.'b

I don't trust the above authority an inch and would therefore ask you to investigate and to do me a short, amended version of the passage concerned, if possible putting it straight into English. I shall look up the information you ask for at the Museum tomorrow.0

Your

K. M.

92

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 17 Septemberd [1857] Dear Engels,

'Bernadotte' is a difficult subject. The French generals who wrote under Louis Philippe are mostly his unqualified PARTISANS, just as

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published m English for the first time

[^2]: IN RYDE

[^3]: a The source quoted below has not been found. - b See J. Bern, 'Ueber die Vertheidigung Warschau's am 6 und 7 Sept. 1831', Allgemeine Zeitung, Nos. 470-75, 3-6 December 1831. - c A reference to the material for Engels' article 'Bridge, Military' which Marx promised to look up for him in the British Museum Library. - A April in the original





**[p. 170]**

1. His part in the battle of Austerlitz204 as a consequence of the manoeuvres he executed before the same.

2. His conduct at the batde of Jena46; and before the batüe of Eylau.191

3. His conduct at the battle of Wagram.206

As regards his embassy in Vienna, things were not quite as you present them." It has been shown (by inter alia Schlosser, Zur

Beurtheilung Napoleons) that the Bonapartist journals in Paris denounced Bernadotte as a royalist because he did not hang out the French flag. They drove him into taking the step which Bonaparte subsequently disavowed.

All in all, Bonaparte sensed that Bernadotte was the 'statesman' amongst his generals and one intent on pursuing his 'own plans'. He, and more notably his brothers, by their base and petty intrigues against Bernadotte, gave him greater prominence than he could otherwise have laid claim to.

Napoleon was, in general, beastly to anyone he suspected of 'self-seeking'.

Your

K. M.

Blücher. I'd like you to write something about his principal battles, his military qualities generally and, finally, the tactical merits upon which Griesheim lays so much stress.b

Bessières, Brune, Brown, Bugeaud, ditto. Bosquet in the Crimean campaign. Let me have Dana's list of B's as I have lost my copy.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, ,. , , jgj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 165. - b G. von Griesheim, Vorlesungen über die Taktik.



