---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "93. Engels to Marx. 18September "
Page_Range: "206-208"
---

# 93. Engels to Marx. 18September 



**[p. 93]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Ryde, Friday, 18 September 1857

Dear Marx,

Your letter arrived yesterday afternoon, too late for me to get anything done for B. Moreover, I was in Portsmouth when the letter got here, so that more time was lost, otherwise I'd have been able to translate the Bern thing for you.a You seem to be having bad weather; here it's persistently fine, only too hot; last week there was an occasional heavy shower, but apart from that it was fine and warm all the time. The climate here is really marvellous and the vegetation, except for things needing very hot sunshine, is so southern one might almost be in Naples. The hedges are laurel. I'm improving rapidly, the actual complaint is quite over, there's no longer a sign of inflamed glands and my one concern now is the process—admittedly a lengthy one—of patching up, getting the sores to heal, and putting on flesh and fat. Bathing does me a great deal of good and I find I can swim like a fish again—proof of how well my treatment is going. I've been to see Pieper at Bognor; quite a nice little place, but not a patch on Ryde; I wonder how long he'll stay there—he's lucky, but for that very reason his 'yeenius' is again reasserting itself; he attributes his luck to personal merit and already half fancies himself king of Bognor. He's coming over on Sunday and Steffen too, perhaps. I am going to Brighton SOMETIME NEXT WEEK and sailing from there to Jersey; Schramm is also going there,188 or so he writes. Why don't you slip down to Brighton and, if it can be fitted in with the work, come to Jersey too? Anyhow the sea-trip would do you good. What do you think? I shall stay here until Tuesday at any rate, perhaps even longer: je verrai}1

As to Bern, all I should say is this: *At the battle of Iganin, where he commanded the artillery, he was noticed for the skill and perseverance with which he fought it against the superior Russian batteries. At Ostrolenka, he again commanded the artillery in this capacity0; when the Polish army

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 166-68. - b I shall see - c as an artillery major





**[p. 172]**

The other matters are quite trivial. I have no material to hand about Iganin; it was a quite unimportant engagement, the defence of a dam, rendered fruitless as usual by an outflanking move- ment—the 40 cannon of heavy calibre are certainly a figment, likewise the Russian retreat at Ostrolenka, which can only have referred to tirailleursh and soutiens,11 or a couple of exposed battalions. What I have said above puts the thing in the most favourable light, for Diebitsch forbade any pursuit.

Many thanks for the thing on bridges.d Wholly adequate. On Sunday or Monday I shall be sending you 'Battle', 'Battery' and any other B's I have finished, and then get on smartly with the remainder. I shall also let you have something on Blücher one of these days, as soon as I've read through Miif- fling.e

Which French generals and which of their exploits do you wish me to investigate more particularly? Allow me as much time as possible since I can't work very well for more than 2 hours at a stretch.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: a Part of this passage was used by Marx and Engels in their article 'Bern'. - b skirmishers - c second-line troops - d excerpts from various sources made by Marx for the article 'Bridge, Military', on which Engels was working - e [F.K.F.] Muffling, Passages from My Life.

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



