---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "94. Marx to Engels. 21 September "
Page_Range: "208-209"
---

# 94. Marx to Engels. 21 September 



**[p. 94]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RYDE

[London,] 21 September 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Engels,

Nothing could please me more than to hear that your health is progressing.

Last Friday, a letter arrived from Dana, cool and curt. I replied that I would complain to the POST OFFICE at once. Further, having 'Algeria' and 'Ammunition' to hand, I sent them off207 with the comment that I had copies of them; also that I had 'Army' in the original, and would send it off immediately a fresh copy had been made (I did this because in recent letters you have several times mentioned that 'Army' was almost finished); also, that 'Artillery' would for the most part come under the HISTORY OF CANNON and that I no longer had the manuscript. The only A's now remaining—and these I would send on the off-chance, although it is probably by now too late—were, all told, 'Army', 'Armada' and 'Ayacucho'. I mentioned the last 2 because you can keep them quite short, while the material I have sent you will provide some original stuff on the Armada and Ayacucho (about Espartero). That's how matters stand.

Tomorrow I shall send off 3 more biographies.* My circumstances won't permit me to come to Brighton, still less accompany you to Jersey.

On closer examination I find that all I want from you on the generals under B is an answer to my question about Bernadotte together with the essentials concerning Blücher, Bugeaud, Bosquet (in the Crimean War). I have enough on the other Frenchmen. Finally, Sir G. Brown, about whom I know nothing. Not much needed on the man.

I have sent Dana your B and C lists. Salut.

Your

[^1]: K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, i Q|« Published in English for the first time 'Bennigsen' by Marx and Engels and 'Blum' and 'Bourrienne' by Marx



