---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "96. Engel s to Marx. 22 September "
Page_Range: "211-216"
---

# 96. Engel s to Marx. 22 September 



**[p. 176]**

Your

F. E.

What's the position as regards your trip? Havelock seems to be the best chap in India, and it is a really tremendous feat to have marched 126 miles in a week in that climate, not to mention fighting 5 or 6 engagements. That it would end in a general outbreak of cholera might have been predicted.

I hardly see The Times at all here, otherwise I could write to you at greater length about India, but getting hold of newspapers to read here is altogether too difficult.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, , . „ , . , r j g 13 Published in English for the first

time

96 ENGELS TO MARX

Ryde, 22 September 1857 Dear Marx,

Here is a bit more about Bernadotte at Wagram206: On 5 July, when the French attack had been halted—largely as a result of his irresolute conduct—Bernadotte was occupying the village of Aderklaa in the centre, and slightly in advance of the French line. On the morning of the 6th, when the Austrians moved up for a concentric attack, he was out in the open plain in front of Aderklaa instead of occupying the village in strength and positioning his front to the rear of it. When the Austrians arrived on the scene he thought this position too hazardous (on the previous day his troops had ultimately suffered severe losses owing to his irresolute conduct) and withdrew to a plateau behind Aderklaa, yet left the village unoccupied, whereupon Bellegarde's Austrians promptly occupied it in strength.

This endangered the French centre, and Masséna, who com- manded it, sent forward a division which recaptured the place

[^1]: IN LONDON





**[p. 177]**

'Army' is finished, so far as the historical side is concerned, up to the French Revolution. I shall now get on with the modern period and questions of organisation generally, with which I conclude, and then, as soon as possible, go back to doing B's so that you can keep on sending stuff, thus putting Mr Dana into a better humour. Meanwhile I have received a little more money and enclose a £5 note. Perhaps you will manage to spend one or two days in Brighton after all; I shall stay here a day or two longer and let you know when I am going there.

Bugeaud. Most of this is already implicit in the article 'Algeria'. He was a mediocre general whose victories in Algeria and Morocco are of no great significance. That he conquered Algeria with 100,000 men, adapted his conduct of the war there to the terrain and the enemy, and broke, or rather suppressed, the resistance of the Arabs (not the Kabyles), does not, to my mind, earn him a very high rating, for I don't believe he was responsible for the plans. He was something of a sabreurb and, on the Tafna,208

showed not only that he was venal but also that he was irresolute when in a tight corner. With 100,000 men and subordinates such as Lamoricière, Changarnier, Cavaignac, Négrier and Duvivier, who had ten years of warfare behind them, he would not need very much natural ability to achieve something—especially since the French General Staff is very good; furthermore, his activity was largely confined to making dispositions (where there's no knowing how much was done for him by the staff) and to commanding the reserve, since only individual divisions and brigades were operat- ing at any one spot.

Bosquet. On the Alma209 he led the French right wing in an outflanking movement against the Russian left wing with a determination and speed which earned the recognition of the Russians; he even succeeded in getting the artillery onto the plateau up trackless defiles regarded as impassable. For this he would deserve high praise had he not been facing a numerically very much inferior opponent.—At Balaklava he was immediate-

[^1]: a A. H. Jomini, Vie politique et militaire de Napoléon, t. 3. Engels' notes on Bernadotte (see this volume, pp. 164-65) were used by Marx in his article 'Bernadotte'. - b swashbuckler





**[p. 178]**

Whether he's up to much as a general en chef is hard to say; he has a number of qualities and if, as in his case, a man is a first-rate vanguard general, all that remains is for him to prove his strategic ability, but for this there was not much opportunity throughout the whole of the Sebastopol campaign.210

Blücher. During the 1794 campaign in the Palatinate211 he distinguished himself as an outpost general and light cavalry commander. The best proof of this is to be found in his published diary, still regarded as a classic despite the bad German.b He kept the French constantly on the qui vive, while providing his headquarters with first-rate intelligence on the movements of the enemy, and he was continually carrying out coups de main and surprise attacks, for the most part successfully. At Auerstedt in 1806,205 when his cavalry charge miscarried, his advice that it be repeated using all available reinforcements was rejected (this from memory). His withdrawal to Lübeck and the stubborn stand he put up is one of the few honourable episodes in this affair, though during the course of it his strategic moves were often of the Hussar type. Nor was it his fault that he was finally captured for, like the whole of the Prussian army, he was cut off and had, moreover, the longest detour to make round the rearguard. During the period up to 1813 he was regarded by Scharnhorst and the Tugendbund212 (being one of its known leaders,

[^1]: a Almost the whole of this passage is reproduced in the article 'Bosquet' by Marx and Engels. - b G. L. Blücher, Kampagne-Journal der Jahre 1793 und 1794.





**[p. 179]**

*'It was no secret to Europe, that Prince Blücher who had now, 1815, passed his 70th year, understood nothing whatever of the conduct of a war; so little, indeed, that when a plan was laid before him for approval, even relating to some unimportant operation, he could not form any clear idea of it or judge whether it was good or bad.'*

For he was quite incapable of reading a map, a strategical disability he shared with almost half of Napoleon's marshals. On the other hand he had Gneisenau, whom he trusted implicitly. Without Blücher, the campaign of 1813 and 1814 would have ended very differendy; no other general of that time could have done what he did—namely, by means of a victory and a skilfully conducted pursuit (Katzbachc) weld the most refractory elements

(Langeron and York in open rebellion against him) into a homogeneous army214 capable of anything and with which, on his own responsibility, he could risk marching on Wartenburg and the Saale—militarily a most audacious but politically (because of Bernadotte) an essential move, thereby abandoning all his communications and compelling the sluggish large army (which he had saved in Silesia after the battle of Dresden, 5 by pursuing the French as far as Bautzen so that Napoleon had to turn against him) to chance its arm too at Leipzig.198 Altogether it was a somewhat rebellious time, and Blücher had agreed with SU of the Army of the North (Bülow, Tauentzien, Wintzingerode) that if Bernadotte made no move they would, on their own responsibility, join up with Blücher. After the batde of Leipzig, Blücher was the only one who applied himself in any way to the pursuit, though

[^1]: a Frederick William III - b [F. K. F.] Muffling, Passages from My Life (below Engels quotes from p. 225 of this book). - c Polish name: Kaczawa.





**[p. 180]**

Your

F. E.

Note O/H 06012, Manchester, 15 Jan. 1857

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, I913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a at whatever cost - b Szczecin - c Basically - d Finally - e Engels' description of Blücher here was used in the article 'Blücher' by Marx and Engels.



