---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "97. Mar x to Engels. 23 September "
Page_Range: "216-217"
---

# 97. Mar x to Engels. 23 September 



**[p. 97]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RYDE

[London,] 23 September [1857]

Dear Engels,

Very many thanks for the letter and enclosure. I would, of course, very much like to see you before you leave. // at all feasible I shall come down to Brighton. The trouble is that the end of the quarter brings an accumulation of all the DIFFICULTIES one has been staving off throughout the summer. The main thing—and the only way out of my quandary—is to get on quickly with the Cyclopaedia. The coming of autumn also means redeeming this and that from the pawnshops.

I hope to have done with the biographies (all of them) by next week.218 (Is there anything to be said about that jackass, Sir G. Brovm?)

I have begun a SERIES in the Tribune on the Bonaparte regime's deeds of financial derring-do.219 To this I devote the days when there is no Indian news. I should like also to have a personal discussion with you about India, MAP IN HAND. Up till now I have always managed instinctively to hit the nail on the head. But soon it will be time for me to provide a kind of general military summary of the affair.

A few days ago, on my way to the Museum,a I came such a purler that my forehead is still complaining.

I trust you are taking iron. A day or two ago I was talking to Dr Lichtenberg at the German hospital, a very knowledgable little chap. He said that it was indispensable in after-treatment.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, I913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a the British Museum



