---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "100. Engels to Marx. 6 October "
Page_Range: "222-225"
---

# 100. Engels to Marx. 6 October 



**[p. 187]**

In writing my biographies, etc., I naturally had to consult all sorts of encyclopaedias, including German ones. In so doing I discovered that, under the headings 'Labour', 'Classes', 'Produc- tion', etc., much had been systematically if stupidly cribbed from us. On the other hand, everyone had eschewed all mention of ourselves, even when devoting whole columns to Mr Edgar Bauer and other such panjandrums. Tant mieux pour nous} The biographies in the German encyclopaedias are written for children under 8 years of age. The French, if biased, are at least urbane. The English encyclopaedias crib systematically from the French and German. In the latter, the same fellows appear to unload the same twaddle onto different publishers. Ersch and Gruber0 not much good except in the later volumes, wherein many learned articles.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Pauly's Realencyclopädie des Alterthums is reliable.

100

St. Hélier, Jersey, 6 October 1857 3 Edward Place

Dear Marx,

L'affaire Harney resolved itself when the noble fellow called on Schramm yesterday evening while I was there. He has grown a

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX228

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a N. Machiavelli, Le Istorie Florentine (in Tutte le opère di Niccolô Machiavelli, t. 1). - b So much the better for us. - c Allgemeine Encyclopädie der Wissenschaften und Künste





**[p. 188]**

Schramm is busy with plans for new lodgings but will probably stay where he is after all. I urged him to move further south but, like most people in his condition, he tends to be contrary and also says that it is a question of money and that his relatives were already doing what they could. From Harney's description it's often downright cold here in winter when there's an east wind, and Schramm lives on the side of the town most exposed to the north-west winds. If, as he says, his difficulty in walking is no greater than it was three years ago, the disease may of course drag on for some time yet. Proof that here, too, people can contract consumption and die of it is provided by a case in this very house, for the daughter of my fat landlady succumbed to it. I hardly like to speak to him any more about moving south; it rubs him up the wrong way and he is after all very tetchy, as is only natural. As things stand I have not yet got down to work and there is also a mass of letters to be written; but tomorrow I shall make a start.

[^1]: a Engels alludes to the French saying, 'Au royaume des aveugles les borgnes sont rois' ('In the kingdom of the blind the one-eyed man is king*).





**[p. 189]**

Yesterday I walked to the north coast—5 or 6 miles from here, very good roads, a pretty avenue here and there, magnificent blackberries en masse and a few very lovely small inlets on the coast. The island forms a plateau and once you're on top, it rises very gently almost as far as the north coast, and the beds of the streams are quite shallow. From the northern end you can see a long stretch of France (west coast of the Département de la Manche) and the island of Sark. I couldn't see Guernsey.

Schramm's brother3 has informed him that a friend of his, a (probably Prussian) lawyer by the name of Berger,b about 50 years old, will be arriving in a few days and will spend the winter here. Do you know this individual? Presumably the fellow lives in London, and it is always as well to be informed to some extent about Mr Rudolf Schramm's acquaintances. I have a vague recollection that a fellow of this description bumped into us once in London.

I have also tracked down Steffen's guerrilla warfare in respect of Berg and the Mark: Holleben, Militairische Betrachtungen aus den Erfahrungen eines preussischen Offiziers. This book is his chief authority and maintains that the hedge and ditch country in parts of the Mark and Cleves recalls La Vendée,231 and is admirably suited to a people's war. Not so the people who live there, unfortunately—this being the flat, agricultural part of the Mark. For the rest the book is a good one, but just the thing to encourage Steffen's predilection for skirmishes and guerrilla warfare; it leans too far in this direction.

Kindest regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Enclosed the list for C with comments 232

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a Rudolf Schramm - b Engels means Hermann Buck.

[^4]: 8-194

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time



