---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "103. Engels to Marx. 29 October "
Page_Range: "230-232"
---

# 103. Engels to Marx. 29 October 



**[p. 195]**

Thank you for sending the articles decipher was Lord Burleigh. Best regards to Schramm.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

103

ENGELS TO MARX236

IN LONDON

[St. Hélier,] Jersey, 29 October 1857 3 Edward Place

Dear Marx,

I shall be returning to Manchester a week from today,183 but don't yet know what route I shall take. Your letter induced me to question Heckscher again (I had, of course, already consulted him concerning my return) about the possibility of a fatal relapse. From his reply I can only conclude that he believes a relapse might be fatal only if the lungs were affected, and is willing to guarantee that this will not be so in my case. At all events, he doesn't think Jersey is of much benefit to me any more; either the thing's over, or I must go much further south, and should anyhow return to Manchester, if only as an experiment, since I can always go away again. Now I'm simply waiting for some money and then I'll be off. By that time the HISTORY OF CANNON 235 will be finished and I'd rather do the other things—with possibly a few small exceptions—in Manchester where my books are. I should like to have the D list soon, otherwise Mr Dana will steal a march on us. What else does the noble fellow have to say, or haven't you heard from him?

So drastically has the iron acted on my blood that my pulse has begun racing madly and the blood is always rising to my head; it's

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a A reference to the articles 'Armada' and 'Ayacucho' by Marx and Engels (see this volume, p. 173).





**[p. 196]**

The advancing season is having a most debilitating effect on Schramm. Needless to say, he can only go out very little now and seldom comes into the town and only at the cost of considerable effort. The old philistine3 sent to him by his brotherb is a very bawdy fellow, who knows all the Berlin gossip, but in other ways stupid and boring. However, he'll be able to pester Konrad's worthy brother on Konrad's behalf, and this he has promised me to do. Schramm has had a door made in the wall between his bedroom and living-room which enables him to heat the former a bit and avoid going out into the hall in winter. This has put an end to the house-hunting. He'll hardly outlast the spring, poor devil.

Harney grows more stupid every day. Considering the nature of the feudal arrangements here,237 he should be able to make A DEAL OF POLITICAL CAPITAL out of them, but he doesn't even begin to understand them and, moreover, ruins all the best points made by the little lawyer who supplies him with material and even complete articles. There is, by the way, much that is funny about this dead-and-alive feudal set-up, and the whole business is preposter- ous to a degree. A modern lawyerc for Seigneur and St. Hélier SHOPKEEPERS for vassals—the masquerade is altogether grotesque. Just now the fellows are holding feudal courts of justice; the

prévôt du Seigneur is a CARVER and GILDER who doesn't know a word of French and, although he's the second personage here, hasn't an inkling of what's going on. The Seigneur threatens to confiscate the houses of his unruly vassals, who make up some 60-70 per cent of the total number, while the vassals—DRAPERS and TALLOW- CHANDLERS—threaten to meet force with force. Voilà* the present state of affairs.

Warmest regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: If you write to me on Monday, but IN TIME FOR THE MAIL, your letter will still find me here; whether I shall still be here on Thursday, I am not quite sure.

[^2]: » Hermann Buck - b Rudolf Schramm - c François Godfrey - d the highest court and police officer in medieval France - e such is



