---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "104. Marx to Engels. 31 October "
Page_Range: "232-234"
---

# 104. Marx to Engels. 31 October 



**[p. 197]**

The Sepoys must have defended the ENCEINTE of Delhi very badly238; the real joke was the house-to-house fighting when, presumably, the NATIVE TROOPS were sent in first. So the actual siege—what came afterwards could hardly be described as such—lasted from the 5th to the 14th, long enough for breaches to be made in the unprotected wall by heavy naval guns firing at a range of 300-400 yards. These were already in position by the 5th or 6th. The cannon on the walls do not appear to have been effectively manned, otherwise the English wouldn't have been able to make so swift an approach.

The AMERICAN CRASH is superb and not yet over by a long chalk. We still have to see the collapse of the better part of the import houses; so far only one here and there would appear to have crashed. The repercussion in England would seem to have begun with the Liverpool Borough Bank. Tant mieux.11 That means that, for the next 3 or 4 years, commerce will again be in a bad way.

Nous avons maintenant de la chance.h

I haven't got a STAMP in the house and it is now midnight.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

104

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 31 October 1857

DEAR Frederic,

Have received two letters from Dana. Says first, that 'Arviy' arrived in good time. Secondly, that, because of the COMMERCIAL CRISIS, notice has been given to all European correspondents except for myself and Bayard Taylor; I, however, am to confine myself STRICTLY to 1 ARTICLE PER WEEK—lately I had been trying to break

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: IN ST. HÉLIER IN JERSEY

[^2]: a So much the better. - b We're now in luck.





**[p. 198]**

If you could let me have the HISTORY OF CANNON 2 3 5 by Friday, IT WOULD BE A GREAT BOON. As soon as the next mail arrives from India, you must write to me at some length about the Delhi affair or rather, IF POSSIBLE, d o the whole articlea since this time it has to be purely technical.

I sent the chaps ABOUT 8 sheets under the heading 'Blücher', the same being sub-titled 'THE SILESIAN ARMY IN THE CAMPAIGNS ETC.'.239 A S I had to spend so much time reading Clausewitz, Müffling,b etc., some degree of compensation was called for.

So far as your resolution as to Manchester is concerned, it seems to me QUITE RATIONAL, within Heckscher's LIMITATIONS. Allen, too, says that fatal consequences are likely to result only if the lung is affected but that, in the early days after such a business, it behoves anyone to take care of himself.

T h e doses of iron may have been somewhat too strong. At all events it should have an excellent effect on your BODY. T h e weather here has improved during the past few days.

I SHOULD MUCH LIKE, OLD BOY, TO SEE YOU BEFORE YOUR RETURN TO MANCHES- TER. T h e r e is a certain irony of fate in my being personally embroiled in these damned crises. What SATISFACTION it would give Heinzen s'il le savaitc\

T h e news AS TO Schramm is no less saddening for being predictable. What do you say to Cavaignac's DEATH and the idiocy of o u r liege-lord d?

Your

K. M.

[^1]: With warm regards from the WHOLE FAMILY.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^3]: 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Engels did write it ('The Capture of Delhi'). - b C. von Clausewitz, Der Feldzug von

[^5]: 1812 in Rußland, der Feldzug von 1813 bis zum Waffenstillstand und der Feldzug von 1814 in Frankreich and Der Feldzug von 1815 in Frankreich; [F. K. F.] Muffling, Passages from My Life - c if he knew - d King Frederick William IV of Prussia



