---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "107. Engel s to Marx. 16 November "
Page_Range: "239-242"
---

# 107. Engel s to Marx. 16 November 

My kindest regards to your wife and children. They, too, will be in high spirits despite your bad luck. Day and night I worry over my inability to get you out of it.

Your

F. E.

In Failsworth, 4 miles from here, a manufacturer by the name of Liddle was yesterday hanged in effigy optima forma" while a weaver dressed as a parson read the BURIAL SERVICE. In place of the words 'MAY THE LORD HAVE MERCY UPON YOUR SOUL' he read: 'MAY THE LORD BLAST YOUR SOUL'.—Now is THE TIME FOR JONES, if only he knows how to make use of it.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

107

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 16 November 1857 7 Southgate

Dear Marx,

Enclosed the tableb I forgot yesterday. I have just seen that today's Guardian has everything on Delhi. I'm going home now (6 o'clock) and shall do my best to go through it and get the article,0

if only a short one, done for you; it can go off by the 2nd post as I think I shall have finished it by 12 o'clock. At such short NOTICE there can be no question of tidying it up or correcting the style.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a with due formality - b See p. 205. - c F. Engels, 'The Capture of Delhi'.







