---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "112. Marx to Conrad Schramm. 8 December "
Page_Range: "252-253"
---

# 112. Marx to Conrad Schramm. 8 December 



**[p. 217]**

déluge.250

Salut.

Your

K. M.

How is your health"? It's a long time since you supplied a bulletin.

Since Lupus keeps a regular record of our crisis forecasts, tell him that last Saturday's Economist maintains that, during the final months of 1853, throughout 1854, the autumn of 1855 and 'THE SUDDEN CHANGES OF 1856', Europe has never had more than a HAIR-BREADTH ESCAPE from the IMPENDING CRASH3

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

112

London, 8 December [1857] 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Hampstead

Dear Schramm,

Write soon and tell us how Jersey suits you. I did not see Engels when he passed through London on his return journey because he gave me the wrong time for o u r meeting at the RAILWAYSTATION.*5 Did that ass Revenüow reply? Not that I suppose there's anything at all to the whole affair, since in any case these AMERICANS are incapable of paying just now; I only ask because of the BEHAVIOUR of this mighty hero. And how about Mr Faucher? Has he paid u p yet? T h a t CRAZY Berlinois^ GROWS FROM DAY TO DAY STUPIDER. WITNESS THE FOREIGN

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: MARX T O CONRAD SCHRAMM' 5 1

[^2]: IN ST. HÉLIER IN JERSEY

[^3]: a 'The Deeper Causes of the Recent Pressure', The Economist, No. 745, 5 December 1857. - b See this volume, p. 199. - c Berliner



