---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "116. Marx to Engels. 18 December "
Page_Range: "259-260"
---

# 116. Marx to Engels. 18 December 



**[p. 224]**

Congratulations on your prediction about the Bank Act.a

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Work?,. First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

116

MARX T O ENGELS 2 0

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 December 1857

DEAR Frederick,

Just a few lines written in great haste. I've just received a 3rd and final warning from the rotten rate collector to the effect that, if I haven't paid by Monday, they'll put a BROKER in the house on Monday afternoon. IF possible, THEREFORE, send me a few pounds before Monday. Financial PRESSURE is now even greater than is USUALLY the case with me because, for ABOUT 3 weeks, I have had to pay for everything in cash and ANYTHING LIKE CREDIT has ceased, while ' at the same time /$ of all the money I receive immediately goes to meet floating DEBTS. Moreover, there is only a very little coming in, since I have hitherto been unable to send the Tribune more than one article.b So FAR AS TO PRIVATE MATTERS.

I am working enormously, as a rule until 4 o'clock in the morning. I am engaged on a twofold task: 1. Elaborating the outlines of political economy.250 (For the benefit of the public it is absolutely essential to go into the matter aufondf as it is for my own, INDIVIDUALLY, TO GET RID OF THIS NIGHTMARE.)

2. T h e present crisis. Apart from the articles for the Tribune, all I do is keep records of it,which, however, takes u p a considerable amount of time. I think that, somewhere ABOUT the spring, we ought to do a pamphlet together about the affair253 as a reminder to the German public that we are still there as always, and ALWAYS THE SAME. I have started 3 large record books—ENGLAND, GERMANY, FRANCE. All the material on the American affair is available in the

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 215. - b See this volume, p. 111. - c thoroughly



