---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "117. Mar x to Ferdinand Lassalle. 21 December "
Page_Range: "260-262"
---

# 117. Mar x to Ferdinand Lassalle. 21 December 



**[p. 225]**

In France, and specially at Havre,' the fun (commercial) will probably be started by the 'Germans', whom one cannot altogether help taking into account now. Moreover—apart from the GENERAL ROTTENNESS of the bankrupt State—trade itself would seem to be exceptionally rotten in Marseilles and Bordeaux, everywhere, that is, where infiltration and intervention by foreign elements has stung the beasdy crapauds*1 out of their lousy, mean penny- pinching and TIMIDITY. Au fond,h only in such an immobile coun- try was a Crédit mobilier45 both possible and inevitable. THE

MORE YOU BECOME ACQUAINTED WITH THE M E S S I A S OF NATIONS', THE LESS YOU

LIKE HIM.

Write to me whenever you have the time, for later on you're sure to forget all the 'chronique scandaleuse' of the crisis which is so invaluable to us. I make excerpts from your letters and enter them in the principal record books.

Salut. Kind regards to Lupus. Pieper has the satisfaction of knowing that his ex-principal Saalfeld, with whose wife he had such a tremendous row, HAS GONE TO THE WALL.

Your

K. M.

117

London, 21 December 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Lassalle,

Of the various letters you mention I have received only one, that sent via Freiligrath. I didn't answer, or rather was awaiting a

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jgjo Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE,82

[^3]: IN DÜSSELDORF

[^4]: a Le Havre - b at bottom



MY THANKS FOR Heraclitus.b I have always felt a great TENDERNESS for this philosopher, whom I prefer above all the Ancients save Aristotle. [Later]c philosophy—Epicurus (him in particular), Stoa and Scepticism — [I] had made the object of special study,d but for [political] rather than philosophical [] reasons. While [tendering] my thanks, [I] must at the same time [say] that the work has not yet reached me.

Doubtless [Nutt's] will send it as soon as it comes into their [] [] to write [ Ministry. My views on Palmerston you know, and these have not changed. Besides, I know nothing whatever about the paper6 since Austrian journals are nowhere on display here, and am thus quite ignorant of its general line. Whatever the case, I should be interested to see one or two numbers.254

I live in great isolation here, all my friends except Freiligrath having left London. Anyway, I have no desire for intercourse. Relativement parlant,' Freiligrath is doing quite well as MANAGER of the Swiss Bank and is still the same good-natured, sterling fellow he has always been. Lupus and Engels are in Manchester as before. We still lament the loss of Weerth.

The present commercial crisis has impelled me to set to work seriously on my outlines of political economy,250 and also to prepare something on the present crisis. I am forced to fritter away [] my days earning a living. [Only] the nights remain free for real work and that is disrupted by ill-health. I [have] not yet looked round for a publisher as I know from experience the [] come of it [] when I []. I cannot send you any news, living as I do like a hermit. Throughout last winter and summer my wife was very unwell, but has now recovered in some measure.

If you know Dr Eisner's address please send him my regards.

[^1]: a Marx means his letter to Lassalle of 8 November 1855 (see present edition, Vol. 39). - b F. Lassalle, Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos. - c The manuscript of this letter is seriously damaged. The words in square brackets are editorial reconstructions. The marks of omission stand for passages that cannot be restored. - d Marx is referring to his Nobebooks on Epicurean Philosophy compiled in 1839 and his doctoral dissertation, Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature written in 1840-41. - <" Die Presse- f relatively speaking



