---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "118. Marx to Engels. 22 December "
Page_Range: "262-263"
---

# 118. Marx to Engels. 22 December 



**[p. 227]**

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original seme Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

118

MARX TO ENGELS20

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 December 1857

DEAR Frederick,

Thou hast triumphantly snatched me out of the clutches of the Exchequer, praised be thy name—halleluiah!

and, if he is to be believed, eventually won his 'case'. It would, indeed, seem that the old school—both philologists and Hegelians—were surprised to see such a posthumous blossoming of a by-gone epoch. But we shall be seeing the thing for ourselves and, gift-horse or no, shall look it long and searchingly in the mouth—ON THE EXPRESS CONDITION, OF COURSE, that Heraclitus doesn't reek of garlic. * Fancy only this fellow going up and down the streets of Berlin and 'asking for himself strutting like a peacock, a stride and a stand: biting his lips, with 'a political regard' as who should say: 'This is the man who has written Heraclit.'* The laddie might be of some service to us in finding a publisher, unless, perhaps, he's afraid that competition might endanger the reputation to which he also aspires in the field of economics, thereby losing him his 'case'. I have replied to Friedländer

[^1]: Herewith a letter (with enclosure) from the great Lassalle254 who now positively assures me that he is SERIOUSLY beginning to be known in Berlin by reason of his fame. These EFFUSIONS of a beautiful soul will amuse you and Lupus. The worthy Lassalle took up philosophy and Heraclitusa as he took up the Hatzfeldt case35

[^2]: 3 F. Lassalle, Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos.



