---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "119. Marx to Engels. 25 December "
Page_Range: "263-268"
---

# 119. Marx to Engels. 25 December 



**[p. 228]**

I have written to Lassalle, brief and cool, to say that, while I had received the letter sent through Freiligrath, I hadn't answered it for reasons that could hardly be committed to paper. For the rest a few words, no more.'

Schramm has written to my wife from Jersey; an extremely witty letter. For his sins, Kosmos Leiden has lost 3 of his children; 2 daughters (including Mrs Mevissen) died of consumption and one of his sons went down with the Pacific.

In last Sunday's issue of Reynold's there is a significant attack upon those APOSTATES who advocate UNION with the MIDDLE CLASS. Meaning Jones. I haven't seen the laddie for a long time. He seems to be avoiding me, for which he must have his 'raysons'. However, I shall probably surprise him—ONE FINE MORNING.

Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

119

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 25 December 1857

DEAR Frederick,

Since our first task now is to get a clear idea of conditions in France, I have been re-examining all my extracts on FRENCH

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 225-27.

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time





**[p. 229]**

1. English, North European and American crises have never directly given rise in France to a 'French crisis'; rather the effects have been entirely passive—chronic DISTRESS, LIMITATION OF PRODUCTION, STAGNATION OF TRADE, and GENERAL UNEASINESS. T h e reason: France has a favourable balance of trade with the United States, the HANSEATIC TOWNS, England, Denmark. With Sweden and Norway the balance is unfavourable, but this is more than offset by Hamburg. CONSEQUENTLY these crises can never generate a DRAIN OF BULLION from France and hence will not create A PROPERLY SO-CALLED MONETARY PANIC there. If the Bank, notwithstanding, increases the bank rate, as has happened this time, it does so merely to prevent the capitalists from placing their money more advantageously in those countries. But so long as the EXPORT OF BULLION is the inevitable consequence, not of the balance of trade but simply of the avarice of the PROFITMONGERS, it can, as Bonaparte has now once more demon- strated, be stopped by the gendarmerie. If the country with the favourable balance of trade has not granted long-term credits or ACCUMULATED PRODUCE FOR THE EXPORT TO THE CENTRES OF THE CRISES—and both are repugnant to the PEDLAR-likea nature of your French manufac- turer a n d merchant—it will have to e n d u r e losses, etc., but not an acute crisis. Louis Philippe, too, was misled by the apparent good fortune with which France emerges from the first phase of a GENERAL CRISIS. In his inaugural address before the Chambers on the eve of the February revolution, he congratulated 'la belle France'

3. In France the first effect of the crisis—AGREEABLE TO THE NATURE OF THE crapaud81—is the timorous curtailment of EXPENDITURE and BUSINESS. Hence an accumulation of money in the Bank of France coinciding with a huge d r o p in the circulation of BANK DISCOUNTS. Hence—owing to the circumstance that crises always happen in the autumn and that every French government fears political disturbances at the year's e n d should the bank rate be high at the SETTLEMENT of ACCOUNTS—reduction of the bank rate in December. In December 1847 Louis Philippe ordered the Bank to reduce the bank rate to 4%.

[^1]: UPON THIS PRIVILEGE.

[^2]: 2. Admitting all this, the first phase of the crisis has already affected FRENCH INDUSTRY and COMMERCE more seriously than on any similar occasion in the past.

[^3]: a Marx used the word 'pedlarmassig' here, formed of the English word 'pedlar' and the German 'massig' meaning 'after the fashion of.





**[p. 230]**

5. T h e French crisis proper does not break out until the GENERAL CRISIS has attained a certain level in Holland, Belgium, the Zollverein,256 Italy (including Trieste), the Levant and Russia (Odessa), because in these countries the balance of trade is distinctly unfavourable to France; hence the direct effect of PRESSURE is MONETARY PANIC in France. Once it has hit France, it recoils on those countries d'une manière vraiment admirable^ With Switzerland, France is on the same footing as the United States with England. T h e short-term balance of trade is consistently in France's favour. But since France is substantially in debt to Switzerland, the latter is always apt HEAVILY TO DRAW UPON IT in times of crisis.

[^1]: 6. When the French crisis proper breaks out, it will play the very devil both with the SECURITY MARKET and the SECURITY of that market, the State. (This will also TELL UPON England, which AT THE

[^2]: a stocks - b See 'Bourse du Jeudi 26 novembre 1857', Le Moniteur universel, No. 331, 27 November 1857; 'Bourse du Mardi 22 décembre 1857', Le Moniteur universel, No. 357, 23 December 1857; 'Bourse du Jeudi 29 octobre 1857', Le Moniteur universel. No. 303, 30 October 1857. In these sources the figure 2,985 refers to the shares of the Bank of France. The corresponding figure for Orleans Railways is 1,300, which bears out Marx's argument on the buoyancy of railway stock. - c 'Situation de la banque de France et de ses succursales', Le Moniteur universel, Nos. 282, 317, 345, 9 October, 13 November, 11 December 1857. - d in truly grand style



PRESENT MOMENT is again gambling in FOREIGN SECURITIES in a m a n n e r splendid to behold.) T h e swindling, which in Hamburg, England, the United States has been the province of PRIVATE CAPITALISTS, is practised in France by the State itself, and the French PEDLARS IN TRADE were all of them GAMBLERS on the Bourse. T h e RECOIL from the Anglo-American crisis sufficed to bring the railways TO A DEADLOCK. What does Mr Bonaparte do? Compels the Bank TO BECOME IN FACT [AJ RAILWAY CONTRACTOR and to make advances to the fellows on the BONDS they were authorised to ISSUE by the SETTLEMENT of 30 November 1856. In 1858 these BONDS will r u n to ABOUT £ 9 million. T h u s the Crédit mobilier,45 which on 3 December was u p to its ears in trouble, is preparing to amalgamate with the Crédit fonder and the Comptoir National d'escompte. Why? Because both the latter are legally entitled to receive ADVANCES from the Bank on their SECURITIES and to have, their DISCOUNTS REDISCOUNTED. So Boustrapa's plan is clear, namely to make the BANK OF FRANCE the entrepreneur for all his fraudulent schemes with the help, not of its own capital, but of the capital which it has merely on deposit and which will drain away ON THE FIRST SIGNAL GIVEN IN THE NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES. IN FACT, this is also an admirable way of ruining the Bank. However it would hardly occur even to Mr Bona to have the CALLS of the SHAREHOLDERS paid by the BANK OF FRANCE. In 1858 these CALLS will amount to over £ 1 0 million for French railways alone u n d e r the SETTLEMENT of 30 November 1856. They will r u n to at least £ 3 0 million for the host of speculative concerns SUCH AS the MERCANTILE

[^1]: AND INDUSTRIAL C O OF MADRID (Rothschilds), the French-American Shipping Company, the Victor Emmanuel Railway, Herserange Ironworks Co., Austrian Railways, Saragossa Co., French-Swiss Railway, LAUSANNE-FRIBOURG RAILWAY, NASSAU COMPANY, Société Générale des Tanneries, Compagnie de la Carbonisation des Houilles, CHIMAY

[^2]: TO MARIENBOURG RAILWAY, Lombard-Venetian RAILWAY, South American STEAM NAVIGATION CO., etc. T h e French haven't an earthly hope of paying these CALLS. Moreover the GERMANS, HOLLANDERS, SWISS, the LARGE HOLDERS OF FRIENCH] SECURITIES, will sell them AT ANY PRICE on the Paris Bourse at the first sign of SERIOUS ALARM, be it in France or d u e to PRESSURE AT HOME. SO it seems that Boustrapa will hardly be able to extricate himself in 1858 unless h e holds out for a bit longer with the help of martial law and assignats.* T h e whole rotten old structure is falling to pieces and the ludicrously rash surge hitherto manifested

[^3]: a Paper money issued by the French revolutionary government in 17H9: withdrawn in 1797.





**[p. 232]**

by the SECURITY MARKET in England, etc., will likewise end in disaster.257

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Pieper arrived today on a visit. As regards the Comptoir National d'escompte de Paris, be it also noted that this institution, which was set u p by the provisional government for the purpose of making bills discountable on the basis of only two signatures and similar less stringent require- ments, was empowered by Boustrapa in 1851, only a day or two after the coup d'état, TO MAKE ADVANCES ON Rentes Françaises, les actions et obligations industrielles ou de crédit constituées en sociétés anonymes.11

Advances on these SECURITIES amounted to £940,000 in 1854/55 and nearly £1,500,000 in 1855/56. Moreover, in 1851 it was given the right TO ESTABLISH un 'Sous Comptoir des Chemins de Fer',h whose sole BUSINESS was to make advances on RAILWAY SHARES and BONDS. At the end of JUNE 1852 its ADVANCES were £520,000, at the e n d of 1852 £1,240,000, 1852/53—£3,600,000; at the end of 1854: £4,560,000, i.e. ABOUT 9 x t h e ADVANCES in 1851. It's the same delectable business that broke the neck of the Scotch Exchange Banks in 1846/47.

* Has Dr Borchardt not yet suspended his payments? * I trust you won't go out tippling too much during the holiday and these exciting times in Manchester and that you'll pay due attention to your health. Warmest regards to Lupus. WHAT is FRIEND CHARLEYC about? and OLD Hill?

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow. 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a French government stocks, the shares and bonds of industrial and banking concerns incorporated with limited liability. - b a railway suboffice - c presumably Charles Roesgen



