---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "123. Marx to Engels. 5 January "
Page_Range: "272-274"
---

# 123. Marx to Engels. 5 January 



**[p. 1858]**

122

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 January 1858 Dear Engels,

No article having arrived from you today, I have sent none to New York and shall therefore send 2 next week. I hope you will have one READY by Tuesday,3 it being absolutely essential to write about India since a great STRUGGLE over military no less than commercial matters is taking place between the Tribune and The New-York Times. The Times, you see, RETAINS the London Times.

Enclosed:

1 Star, 1 Daily News, 1 Overland Mail (the most recent not yet out). No doubt this will be sufficient. Your

K. M.

123

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 5 January [1858]

Dear Engels,

Have had your note. You don't say whether you have received my letter enclosing those of Lassalle and Friedländer.b I'd like to be sure that both will be preserved.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'The Siege and Storm of Lucknow'. - b See this volume, pp. 227-28





**[p. 238]**

As to C, I am IN FACT in a considerable quandary. Nothing more has been sent to Dana since 27 November,259 as I finished my own share of it (i.e. the non-military stuff) long ago. If circumstances in Manchester don't admit of your seriously applying yourself to the business this month, I shall have to give it up altogether and tell Dana on some PRETEXT or other that I can't go on with the Cyclopaedia. The fact that I send him long, new lists before polishing off the old ones cannot fail in the end to arouse his suspicions and compromise me. CONSEQUENTLY he's not even answering, let alone sending anything fresh. Nor can work of this kind be remunerative when there are constant hiatuses of a month or more.

STILL, I try to avoid mentioning the matter to you because the last thing I want is to subject you to any strain that might damage your health. YET sometimes it seems to me that, if you could manage to do a little every two days or so, it might act as a CHECK on your junketings which, from what I know of Manchester and AT THE PRESENT EXCITED TIMES, seem to me 'unavoidable' and far from good for you.

Nor can there be any question at present of my taking over the military stuff, which would entail spending a great deal of time at the Museum4 to no real effect, for it's absolutely essential that I should finish off my other work250—and it takes up all my time—even if the house should come tumbling about my ears!

So, *my boy, try to come to a definitive resolution—one way or the other*.

Warm regards.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a the British Museum Library



