---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "126. Marx to Engels. 7 January "
Page_Range: "277-279"
---

# 126. Marx to Engels. 7 January 

Many regards to your wife and little ones.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . . . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l n l e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

126

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 January 1858

DEAR Frederic,

I received your article1" at 5 o'clock on Tuesday afternoon. It is HIGHLY AMUSING and will delight the Yankees. The news from India, by the by, is no longer quite so favourable to the worthy English. POOR Havelock!

I have definitely not had your letter about Lassalle.c So it has either got held up somewhere in Manchester or has been intercepted down here.260

Lupus' letter to the family, who send you their regards, HAS

Pieper was here during the Christmas holidays. He arrived in a state of alcoholic remorse and was more vapid and boring THAN EVER. The older the fellow grows the worse he becomes. He seems to have acquired the pleasant habit of drinking first thing in the morning, not tea or coffee, but a PINT [OFJ STOUT, which gives him A SHEEPS EYE for the rest of the day. Indeed, the combination of dilettantism and sententiousness, fadaise6 and pedantry makes him ever harder to stomach. And, as often in the case of such laddies,

[^1]: PRODUCED A GREAT SENSATION.

[^2]: a C. von Clausewitz, Vom Kriege, Vol. I, Book 2, Chapter 3. - b F. Engels, 'The Siege and Storm of Lucknow'. - <•' See this volume, p. 240. - d vapidity





**[p. 243]**

K. M.

Apropos. In his last number of the Pionier Heinzen remarks that, while it was quite comprehensible that the stultified workers in Germany should have been deluded by two sophists into believing they formed a distinct class because they plied a plane, it

[^1]: T h e 'Neapolitan Question',1 3 which has caused earnest politi- cians such a lot of head-scratching, has now been resolved by the EARTHQUAKE IN A MOST DELIGHTFUL MANNER. At least that's what the POTHOUSE POLITICIANS OF THE MORNING ADVERTISER say. You won't forget to send the Guardian, will you? Above all I beg you to take care of your health. Times will get better and will make considerable CLAIMS on your BODY. SO temper it and see that it comes to no harm.

[^2]: Salut.

[^3]: Your



