---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "128. Engels to Marx. 14 January "
Page_Range: "282-283"
---

# 128. Engels to Marx. 14 January 



**[p. 247]**

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

128

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 14 January 1858 7 Southgate

Dear Marx,

Herewith the article,b though it has just occurred to me that by a ludicrous slip I have written Wilson throughout instead of Inglis; perhaps you would alter this as there's no time to do so now.

I shall do a few more C's for Tuesday, and finish 'Cavalry', which should make a good article and also be somewhat longer.

Apropos, have you done 'Coehoorn' (Baron)? If not I have some excellent material.

NB. I've no material whatever on 'Catapults'—there should be something in Ersch and Gruber.c

•ENTIRELY UNAIDED: Must have been damned badly cooked. The Daily News has something on Windham, but not enough. Kindest regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

My health is good. The sores have all been healed for the last 6 weeks. Heckscher is very satisfied with the way the thing is

[^1]: The Lucknow garrison's greatest act of heroism consisted in the f a c t THAT THEY HAD TO FACE EVERY DAY THE COARSE BEEF' COOKED BY THE LADIES,

[^2]: a C. von Clausewitz, Der Feldzug von 1812 in Rußland, der,Feldzug von 1813 bis zum Waffenstillstand und der Feldzug von 1814 in Frankreich and Der Feldzug von 1815 in Frankreich. - b F. Engels. 'The Relief of Lucknow'. - c Allgemeine Encyclopädie der Wissenschaften und Künste bearbeitet und herausgegeben von J. S. Ersch und J. G. Gruber.



