---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "130. Marx to Engels. 16 January "
Page_Range: "283-286"
---

# 130. Marx to Engels. 16 January 



**[p. 248]**

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

129

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 15 January 1858

Dear Marx,

Judging by the enclosed letter from Harney, it seems most doubtful whether Schramm is still alive. I wrote to Harney straight away. As soon as I hear anything further I shall let you know.

Your

F. E.

130

[London,] 16 January 1858

Dear Frederick,

You, too, will have had a letter from Harney about friend Schramm. There was no prospect of recovery. A pity, though, that money worries—for which the fat London philistine3 is to blame—should have clouded his last days.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS266

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a Rudolf Schramm, brother of Conrad Schramm





**[p. 249]**

On Monday I shall again visit the Museum,b after which I shall send you 'Catapult'—along with the other stuff you ask for— drawn from the best sources. I have not done 'Coehoorn', as it would have taken me too much time to unearth the correct sources.

I am EXCEEDINGLY glad to learn that your health is progressing WELL. For the past 3 weeks I, too, have again been dosing myself and only stopped doing so today. I had been overdoing very much my nocturnal labours, accompanied, it is true, by mere lemonade on the one hand, but AN IMMENSE DEAL OF TOBACCO on the other. I am, by the way, discovering some nice arguments.250 E.g. I have completely demolished the theory of profit as hitherto pro- pounded. What was of great use to me as regards method of treatment was Hegel's Logic at which I had taken another look BY MERE ACCIDENT, Freiligrath having found and made me a present of several volumes of Hegel, originally the property of Bakunin. If ever the time comes when such work is again possible, I should very much like to write- 2 or 3 sheets making accessible to the common reader the rational aspect of the method which Hegel not only discovered but also mystified.

Of all recent economists, Monsieur Bastiat with his Harmonies économiques represents the very dregs of fatuity at their most concentrated. Only a crapaud61 could have concocted an harmoni- ous pot-au-feu"1 of this kind.

What do you think of our friend Jones245? I still refuse to believe that the chap has sold himself. Perhaps his experience of

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'The Relief of Lucknow'. - b the British Museum Library - c stew



Herewith a letter for Lupus from Laura and Jenny. T h e two GIRLS naturally imagine that you might take umbrage at Lupus appearing to be preferred as a correspondent. Hence they have earnestly admonished me not to forget to tell you THAT YOURS SHALL

BE THE NEXT TURN.

I shall wait another 3 weeks until the situation has pretty well come to a head a n d then write to Mr Dana saying that I cannot go on working for the Tribune if I'm restricted to 4 articles a month, and that 6 is the minimum. In fact I am now invariably obliged to compress into 1 article sufficient material for 2, and hence am doing double the work for HALF THE PRICE. THIS WILL

K. M.

[^1]: NEVER DO.

[^2]: Did you enclose Lassalle's and Friedländer's letters b in the one about Lassalle260 which went astray? For political reasons, it would be desirable to preserve them.

[^3]: Salut.

[^4]: Your

[^5]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^6]: Printed according to the original

[^7]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^8]: a Reynolds's Newspaper- b See this volume, pp. 227-28.



