---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "131. Marx to Engels. 23 January "
Page_Range: "286-287"
---

# 131. Marx to Engels. 23 January 



**[p. 131]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 23 January 1858

Dear Engels,

I have received: 1. Copies of the Guardian; 2. C ('Carabine', etc.269). You have not told me whether you got my letter, together with an enclosure for Lupus, sent off a week ago today.3

Herewith a letter from Dana which you must return as it has not yet been answered. O n e disagreeable consequence so far as I am concerned is that I am already considerably in the fellows' debt, having miscalculated what was d u e to me and drawn a further amount after sending off 'Cannon'. 2 3 5 T h e PAY, by the by, isn't even A PENNY THE LINE.

As regards the new B articles Dana is asking for—and for me the main thing is to pay off as quickly as possible what 1 have overdrawn on Appleton, otherwise I shall be unable to draw anything on the Tribune and hence be stone broke—they are, with one exception, taken from the list you drew up. As regards that one exception—'THE HISTORY OF THE BENGAL REBELLION'—I suggest the most appropriate course would be tell Dana straight out it can't be done. How get hold of the sources at such short notice? Since it 'SHALL BE SF.XT AT ONCE' and must be 'AS BRIEF AS POSSIBLE', the work involved would be out of all proportion to the PAY and it would simply prevent us from getting on with the other articles. What is your opinion? T h e military side is the more important, but it seems to me that the whole, whether military or political, has not yet reached the stage where it could be 'sent AT ONCE'.

Freiligrath writes to say that the great Ernst Dronke has arrived in London from Paris, having left the latter place for the first time on account of the attempted assassination.271

K. M.

[^1]: I cannot recall the MISTAKE IN IIHEI BAITI.E OF-ALBLERA' to which Dana refers.270

[^2]: Salut.

[^3]: Your

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 250.



