---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "132. Engels to Marx. 25 January "
Page_Range: "287-289"
---

# 132. Engels to Marx. 25 January 



**[p. 252]**

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, ,. , , . _ ,. , r , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the f.rst Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

132

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 25 January 1858

Dear Marx,

The letters have all arrived safely. It will be utterly impossible to do the BENGAL REBELLION in the time stipulated and I would advise you, while you are about it, to point out to Mr Dana that, had he been more prompt in agreeing to our proposals and the list we sent him, he would have had all these articles long ago. He can perfectly well fit in BENGAL REBELLION as HINDUSTAN REBELLION or something of the sort.272 As to the alleged howler,270 I can't look into it this moment, there being no time, but shall do so tomorrow. The item was taken from Brockhaus' so it will probably be correct.

Lassalle's letter is still up here. I have the material ready for 'Blenheim', 'Borodino' and many more and you will be receiving a LOT on Friday, provided the Indian MAIL doesn't necessitate my doing an article, which seems unlikely judging by the telegraphic despatch. I shall have to look up 'Bidassoa', etc. But what is all this about Dana saying he had already asked for these articles? It's the first I've heard of it.

Harney will have written to tell you that poor Schramm died a week ago on Friday. I have no details yet. I wrote and asked

[^1]: •' Brockhaus' Konversations-Lexikon



Harney, 2 7 3 should he find anything in your handwriting or mine, to take it away and hold it at our disposal—it would be too bad if anything of that kind were allowed to fall into the hands of Mr Rudolf,3 who has become an out-and-out Prussian. I had not thought Schramm would have any serious attacks before the spring. T h e poor fellow was putting u p a splendid fight against the disease while I was there and, from what I hear, continued to do so until the end. O u r old guard is rapidly dwindling away during this long spell of peace!

Business here is very shaky. Every fortnight an attempt is made to push u p cotton prices, the moment chosen being when a few spinners have to buy. It succeeds for three or four days and then prices fall again. Generally speaking we are now 5/sd above the lowest point. It's much the same with ourselves. As soon as prices become thoroughly depressed as a result of a fortnight's stagna- tion, the Indian and Levantine buyers step into the market and force everything up; after that no one wants to buy and prices gradually fall again. Everything is still far from normal. T h e spinners are going on to full time, not because there is any real demand, but because others are doing so and because they're heartily sick of SHORT TIME. On the whole the spinners' position has deteriorated because the difference in price between raw cotton and yarn has diminished. T h e Germans are still buying very little. Prospects here are far from brilliant; every day trade suffers a CHECK because of attempts to force u p prices and, if that doesn't happen, they say that THERE IS AN IMPROVED FEELING IN THE MARKET. IMPROVED BE DAMNED!

T h e enclosure for Lupus was a source of great pride and joy to the old man. b He sends his warmest regards to the writers. By the way I hardly saw him at all last week; we kept missing one another and later he h a d a slight touch of tic douloureux? Warm regards to the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: a Rudolf Schramm - b See this volume, p. 250. - c facial neuralgia

[^3]: 10-194

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



