---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "134. Marx to Engels. 28 January "
Page_Range: "289-291"
---

# 134. Marx to Engels. 28 January 



**[p. 133]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 28 January 1858

Dear Moor,

Herewith 3 B articles.274 I had meant, if possible, to do Windham3 as well today, but in the first place the PARTICULARS are still very confused and it is absolutely essential to wait for the official report on the affair, for hitherto everything has been glossed over; and, secondly, I had no time this afternoon, was barely able to look over the 3 articles. Also, I have too bad a cold to risk going into town at midnight to post the letter. Tell Dana that the material is still incomplete.

Have you sent Dana my C list? If not, do so now so that he can reply in good time. Once again his C is LUDICROUSLY INCOMPLETE.

Unfortunately I couldn't make 'Borodino' any shorter since all previous accounts of the battle have been quite wrong.

Your

F. E.

134

[London,] 28 January [1858] 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

DEAR Frederick,

The freezing weather which has set in here and the real shortage of coal in this house compels me—although there's nothing in the world I loathe more—to impose on you again. I have brought

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO"ENGELS20

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: 11 F. Engels, 'Windham's Defeat'.





**[p. 1929]**

myself to do so only after HEAVY PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT. My wife has pointed out to me that you had miscalculated through having sent a remittance from Jersey earlier than usual, and hence would not send anything this month unless I wrote expressly; that she had pawned her SHAWL, etc., etc., and was at a loss where to turn. In short, I must write, which is why I am doing so. Indeed, if these conditions persist, I'd sooner be miles under the ground than go on scraping along in this way. Always to be a burden on others while constantly tormented oneself by beastly trifles becomes unbearable in the long run. I personally can bury myself in my work and escape the misère by devoting my attention to universalities. My wife, OF COURSE, has no such refuge, etc., etc.

Lassalle's book arrived today"; it cost 2/ not the book, but the carriage. This circumstance ensured it a bad reception. 2 volumes of 30 sheets EACH. Have no more than squinted at it. In his preface the fellow deludes readers into believing that he has been gestating it since 1846. Seems altogether Old Hegelian. Very possibly the legal tradition of hermeneutics came in useful for the interpretation and comparison of passages. Nous verrons? though the thing's too bulky to be read from cover to cover.

I have also heard from Mr Pieper. He imparts the interesting secret that, while here, he was suffering from 'abdominal difficulties' and hence 'may' have seemed a bore.

The Orsini, etc., conspiracy271 might well put paid to the Prussian amnesty.275 The day before yesterday the police here forced their way into Orsini's rooms at midnight, and INVEIGLED his maidc into accompanying them to Scotland Yard, where she was interrogated by Mr Richard Mayne and some French mouchards? This escapade, besides compromising Mr Pam, failed in its purpose even more lamentably in that Martin Bernard has taken possession of all letters addressed to Orsini in London since the latter's arrest, Orsini himself having burned all the rest before leaving here.

Salut. ..

Your

[^1]: K. M. First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und . . . . r „ r K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in l ^ t l t "* g ' " full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow,

[^2]: first time

[^3]: a F. Lassalle, Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos. - b We shall see - c Eliza Cheney - d police spies



