---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "135. Marx to Engels. 29 January "
Page_Range: "291-292"
---

# 135. Marx to Engels. 29 January 



**[p. 135]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 January 1858

DEAR Frederick,

T h e 3 B articles received.3 It's excellent that you should have made 'Borodino' longer. Since the fellows' columns are so IMMENSE and their PAY so bad, the only remedy is to lengthen the articles. I hope that when you come to do 'Cavalry' you will spin it out as much as possible so that I can get rid of my DEBTS to those curs.

In France things are splendid. T h e COOLNESS with which the épiciersb responded to the news of the attempted assassination271

has exasperated the fellow.c T h e secret of this indifference of the épiciers is doubtless the unspoken desire of many of them that some sudden political event should get them out of their mess. T h e majority of the laddies had had their bills renewed by the Bank, Discount Association, etc., which were acting on the ORDERS of Boustrapa. 4 0 However, to put off is not to write off. A large number of French bourgeois, with commercial ruin staring them in the face, are anxiously awaiting the day of reckoning. They now find themselves in much the same STATE as Boustrapa before the coup d'état.276 ANY POLITICAL PRETEXT FOR MAKING AN HONOURABLE EXIT WILL,

In my economic work 2 5 0 I have now reached a point at which I could do with some information on practical matters from you, since nothing of the kind is to be found in theoretical writings. I mean, the circulation of capital—how it varies in various kinds of business; the effect of the same on profit and prices. If you can provide me with any information on the subject, it would be VERY welcome.

Mr Lassalle, in his preface to Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos, says inter alia :

[^1]: CONSEQUENTLY, BE EAGERLY SEIZED UPON BY THE DAMNED FELLOWS JUSt a S i t Wa S 10 years ago. Boustrapa knows this and now wishes to act the real 'despot'. Nous verrons? If he pins his faith on Magnan, Castellane, etc., he will be left high and dry.277

[^2]: 'All but a small part of the same' (the book) 'was completed early in 1846, and I was on the point of putting the concluding touches to it when suddenly an interest of a different kind—how true in every respect is Sophocles' dictum:

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'Berme', 'Blenheim', 'Borodino'. - b grocers - c Napoleon III - d We shall see.



