---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "136. Engels to Marx. 30 January "
Page_Range: "292-293"
---

# 136. Engels to Marx. 30 January 



**[p. 257]**

"iro XXà Ta ôeivà, xoùBèu àu6p<!>i Toi> Seiwrepou irèXei"*

— precipitated me into a welter of practical strife and prevented me over a period of nearly 10 years from devoting myself to the completion of this work.'

Do you suppose that Sophocles' verse, put into German by Lassalle, means: 'There's no more frightful specimen of human- kind than the Countess Hatzfeldt!'35

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

136

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 30 January 1858

Dear Marx,

Your two letters arrived together this morning. I enclose a fiver; unfortunately I'm very tight for money myself and Schramm touched me for five pounds at the beginning of January—in the circumstances there was absolutely no question of refusing, but in consequence I was even more broke. 'Windham'b will be ready for Tuesday.

Apropos, would you send me another copy of the B articles Dana asked for (both the original ones and those subsequently ordered) as I have mislaid mine.

Well, the would-be assassins271 may not have bagged Bonaparte, but they caught K. Heinzen all right. . You will recall his bloodthirsty threats of destruction in 1848 and his big talk about

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: How goes it with 'Camp', 'Catapults' and 'Caps' (Percussion)?263

[^3]: a There are many wonderful things, and nothing is more wonderful than man' (Sophocles, Antigone, Lines 339-40). - b F. Engels, 'Windham's Defeat'.



