---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "137. Marx to Engels. 1 February "
Page_Range: "293-296"
---

# 137. Marx to Engels. 1 February 



**[p. 258]**

On the 21st couranth there was another attempt on Bonaparte's life in the Bois de Boulogne, with a pistol; the fellow was arrested before he could pull the trigger. The affair has been hushed up. As soon as I can dispense with the relevant Guardian you shall have it.

I shall send for Charras' Cent jours.c Mightn't we go in for literary criticism in America? An article on the subject would certainly be interesting and not difficult to do.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

137

[London,] 1 February 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Frederick,

£5 arrived. The simultaneous arrival of two letters, of which I sent off one on Thursday, the other on Friday, would seem to

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwis- Printed according to the original chert F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- ijart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS1

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a Well b instant - c J. B. A. Charras, Histoire de la campagne de 1815.





**[p. 259]**

New B's are: 'Bidassoa' (BATTLE OF), 'Blenheim' (ditto), 'Burmah' (WAR IN), 'Bomarsund' (SIEGE), 'Borodino' (BATTLE), 'Brescia' (ASSAULT), 'Bridge-head', 'Bülow', 'Buda' (SIEGE OF), 'Beresford', 'Berme'.* When Dana says, 'MOST OF THEM I ASKED YOU BEFORE-, he is mistaken, and is confusing your list of B's with his own. All he himself ordered was:

'Barbette', 'Bastion', 'Bayonet', 'Barclay de Tolly', 'Battery', 'Battle', 'Bern', 'Bennigsen', 'Berthier', 'Bernadotte', 'Bessières', 'Bivouac', 'Blindage', 'Blücher', 'Blum', 'Bolivar', 'Bomb', 'Bombar- dier', 'Bombardment', 'Bomb (Ketch, Proof, Vessel)', 'Bonnet', 'Bosquet', 'Bourrienne', 'Bridge' (pontoon), Brown (Sir George), 'Brune', 'Bugeaud'.3 (The ass has received the lot.)

I have done 'Catapult' for you (not very much). Likewise the better part of 'Castrum'b (but I still have to look up Greek camps in Wachsmuth, Hellenische Alterthumskunde, and Jewish in de Wettec). It's a lengthy business where PERCUSSION CAPS263 are concerned because there are so many different types of gun-locks, etc., to be listed. I'd have already finished the job if it hadn't been for the new order from Dana. I'll send you all the rubbish at the same time. Besides, whenever I'm at the Museum,d there's such a LOT of stuff to look up that it's closing-time (now 4 o'clock) before I've so much as looked round. Then there's the journey there. So much time lost.

Heraclitus, the Dark Philosopher by Lassalle the Luminous One is, au fond,e a very silly concoction. Every time Heraclitus uses an image to demonstrate the unity of AFFIRMATION and NEGATION—and this is often—IN STEPS Lassalle and makes the most of the occasion by treating us to some passage from Hegel's Logic which is HARDLY improved in the process; always at great length too, like a schoolboy who must show in his essay that he has thoroughly understood his 'essence' and 'appearance' as well as the 'dialectical process'. Once he has got this into his speculative noddle, one may be sure that the schoolboy will nevertheless be able to carry out the process of ratiocination only in strict accord with the prescribed formula and the formes sacramentales.1 Just so our Lassalle. The fellow seems to have tried to puzzle out Hegelian logic via Heraclitus, nor ever to have tired of beginning the process all over again. As for learning, there is a tremendous

[^1]: a All names and parentheses written in English by Marx. - b 'Camp' - c Probably a reference to W. M. L. de Wette's Lehrbuch der hebräisch-jüdischen Archäologie - d the British Museum Library - e basically - f hallowed forms





**[p. 260]**

Heraclitus, the Dark Philosopher, is quoted as saying in an attempt to elucidate the transformation of all things into their opposite: 'Thus gold changeth into all things, and all things change into gold.' Here, Lassalle says, gold means money (c'est justec) and money is value.d Thus the Ideal, Universality, the One (value), and things, the Real, Particularity, the Many. He makes use of this surprising insight to give, in a lengthy note, AN EARNEST OF HIS

[^1]: a G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. - b Sophie von Hatzfeldt (see this volume, p. 257) - c that is correct - d F. Lassalle, Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunk Un von Ephesos, Bd. I, S. 222-23.



