---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "140. Engels to Marx. 11 February "
Page_Range: "298-300"
---

# 140. Engels to Marx. 11 February 



**[p. 263]**

at the e n d of December) writes inter alia: * ' I n the article "Artillery" in speaking of the equipment of the Prussian army, you use the words seam-horses; what are they? I d o not find them in any dictionary.'* Answer by return, so that I can write to the ass about it on Friday.

I suspected that all was not quite well with you. You really must take care of yourself. You've been overdoing things during the Manchester 'period of Sturm und Drang'.279 More soon.

Your

K. M.

Did Harney DEAR send you also his Independent* NONSENSE? -Who do you suppose concocted Schramm'^ fife story? Harney makes out that THE CELEBRATED POET Freiligrath—alongside whom Engels ESQ looks odd—was the publisher of the Revue der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung*

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

140

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 11 February 1858

Dear Moor,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: Dana can't r e a d — t h e word is TEAM-HORSES, i.e. THE HORSES HARNESSED

[^3]: TO ANY GUN OR CARRIAGE IN ORDER TO DRAW IT. T h e e x p r e s s i o n 'TEAM' Cr Op S u p frequendy elsewhere in the article0 and if he wants an authority let him look u p the article on 'Artillery' in the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Unfortunately I can't send you anything today. Yesterday I let myself be talked into attending a COURSING MEETING at which hares are hunted with greyhounds, and spent 7 hours in the saddle. All

[^4]: a The Jersey Independent - b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue - c F. Engels, 'Artillery'.



Lupus has apparently retired from the world of pubs. During 4 visits to the Chatsworth, his regular haunt, I only ran into him once. Since I only go there on his account, it has been a great waste of time and something will have to be done about it.

I too have been sent Harney DEARS rubbish.b For this Harro Harring, who lives in Jersey (though I never saw him), must take the chief blame. The description of Krefeld is killing. Real vintage Harney. He has turned Schramm's death into yet another great melodramatic spectacle, the principal role being played by G. J. H.c of course. The whole affair, funeral and all, his letters headed HASTE! IMMEDIATE!, etc., and then the presumption of asking me to come to Jersey to figure among the crapauds91 and Waschlapskisd—I find the whole affair repugnant. He's a rotten little blighter and Jersey is just the right place for him; moreover he is absolutely delighted at having involved his paper in a libel action brought by François Godfrey, Jersey's feudal lord.237

The 'Engels ESQ' certainly does look very odd. I ought never to forgive Harney, if only because the best he has to say of me boils down to Esq. Grosse bête!e

Jones, too, is evidently up to some pretty tricks. The obese Livesay, whom he appointed CHAIRMAN of his conference,245 is a wretched little bourgeois who swears by Miall and who, in company with Sturge & Co., engineered the COMPLETE SUFFRACE SECESSION as long ago as 1842 when all the petty bourgeois withdrew.280

But NEVER MIND. Mr Bonaparte travaille pour nous.' The way he is running things, we couldn't possibly ask for anything better. Espinasse, Minister of the Interior! THAT BEATS COCK FIGHTING. And on top of that, the idiocy of publishing those addresses.281

[^1]: a G. von Griesheim, Vorlesungen über die Taktik. - b See previous letter. - c George Julian Harney - d Waschlapski, of which the English equivalent would be Dishragski, is the name of a down-at-heel nobleman in Heine's satirical poem Zwei Ritter. By the

[^2]: crapauds and Waschlapskis Engels means French and Polish petty-bourgeois refugees in Jersey. - e Silly ass! (Engels wrote this paragraph in the margin.) - f is working for us



