---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "141. Marx to Engels. 14 February "
Page_Range: "300-302"
---

# 141. Marx to Engels. 14 February 



**[p. 265]**

Kind regards to your wife and children. A few articles at any rate will arrive by Monday. As regards India I think we might wait for one more mail, unless anything of real interest crops up.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

141

[London,] 14 February 1858

Dear Engels,

You had promised to send me the Guardian. I was therefore expecting to get it today since France is now the only possible topic for reports and the fellows prefer a few gossipy anecdotes to ANY AMOUNT OF IDEAS. I assume the numbers you promised me will arrive tomorrow but would most urgently beg that in future you always let me have the things for Thursday or for Friday at the latest. After the appointed day they are, OF COURSE, no longer of any use to me for my reports.

For 3 days I shall now be on tenterhooks until I know whether or not my bill, which does not appear to have been despatched

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS20

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER



I CONGRATULATE you UPON YOUR EQUESTRIAN PERFORMANCES. Only don't take too many breakneck jumps, as there will soon be more important occasion for risking your neck. You seem TO RIDE SOMEWHAT HARD THIS HOBBYHORSE. In any case I don't believe that the CAVALRY is the speciality in which you will be of the greatest service to Germany. I would venture another little objection, viz. whether OVEREXERTION IN ANY LINE is compatible with your health. Aurea mediocritasc in all types of exertion, or so at least a doctor assures me, should remain the norm for you for some time yet.

T h e Bonaparte affair271 had indeed put a sorry end to the proposed Prussian amnesty.275 Louis, by the way, is merely aping his putative uncle.283 H e is, in fact, not only Napoleon le Petit (in Victor Hugo's sense d as opposed to Napoléon le Grand) but he PERSONATES IN A MOST ADMIRABLE WAY THE LITTLENESS o f t h e g r e a t N a p o l e o n . I have looked u p Cobbett for 1802-03 where I discover that the 'DEN OF ASSASSINS' AND ALL THAT LITERALLY appeared in the Moniteur of that time.284 Inter alia, the Moniteur of 9 August 1802 declares word for word:

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: •'Either the English government authorises and tolerates these public and private crimes, in which case it cannot be said that such conduct is consistent with British generosity, civilisation, and honour; or it cannot prevent them, in which case it does not deserve the name of government; above all, if it does not possess the means of repressing assassination and calumny and protecting social order.' * e

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 251. - b K. Marx, 'Bolivar y Ponte'. - c The golden mean - d V. Hugo, Napoleon le petit (Hugo first used the phrase in a speech in the Legislative Assembly in 1851). - e This passage from an article in Le Moniteur universel, No. 320, 9 August 1802 (datelined 'Paris, le 19 thermidor') is quoted by Marx in English according to Cobbett's Annual Register. From July to December, 1802, Vol. II.



