---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "142. Engels to Marx. 18 February "
Page_Range: "302-303"
---

# 142. Engels to Marx. 18 February 



**[p. 267]**

First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

142

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 18 February 1858

Dear Moor,

Every day this week I have meant to write to you, and every day the steady rise in prices has stopped me from doing so. You will remember my telling you3 that 6d for Middling Orleans was the highest price compatible with FULL TIME. NOW, with Middling Orleans at 53/4d, 7/8 of all spinners have gone on to FULL TIME, and the result of this asininity is that, out of sheer impatience, they've pushed Middling Orleans up to 7$Uà in 6 weeks! Yarn and cloth haven't followed in the same proportion, of course; the manufac- turer's MARGIN between the price of his raw material and the finished product has been reduced to below cost price and now the asses want to revert to SHORT TIME, which they ought never to have abandoned!

The Guardians will go off today at the same time.

I trust that your bill has been honoured. Since you had in any case advised them so long in advance, they should certainly have told you long ago had there been any intention of returning it.

Enclosed another little thing for Dana.285 If the fellow wants to lay down the law on the strength of his paltry 2 dollars, then he deserves some rough words. At all events he can't expect more than we are already providing—largely original work instead of the measly compilations he is getting from elsewhere. Urge him to pay better and que puis nous verrions}' As regards Badajos,270 the wretched Brockhausc really led me astray.

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 231. - b then we shall see - c Brockhaus' Konversations-Lexikon



