---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "143. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 22 February "
Page_Range: "303-307"
---

# 143. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 22 February 

I shall discuss equitation another time. Au fond" the thing is the material basis for all my military studies, as you know. The crapauds^1 regard the sordid Bonaparte as a hero because he sits elegantly on a horse though only a passable rider; there are plenty of witnesses over here who know that he is A VERY INDIFFERENT FENCER b

and that he shirks many an obstacle which YOUR HUMBLE SERVANT would tackle without a second thought. Moreover riding is the only physical accomplishment in which I have acquired a modicum of competence and anyway the element of danger in hunting and jumping is so small (probability 1:10,000) that it has an irresistible attraction. Anyway, sois tranquille,' if I break my neck it won't be by falling off a horse. Warm regards to all the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

143

London, 22 February 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maidand Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

Nutt has now sent me Heraclitus.d As soon as I have read it all I shall let you have my opinion. But you will have to wait a while

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE286

[^2]: IN DÜSSELDORF

[^3]: a at bottom - b i.e. jumper - c don't worry - d F. Lassalle, Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos.





**[p. 269]**

From the papers you will have seen that Palmerston has fallen. Those best acquainted with the old rascal are generally inclined to suspect that his last BLUNDERS were deliberate, so that he could make his exit pro tempore. They affirm that le dernier but de toute sa vieb

was to engineer a war between England and France, that he now believes he has managed to do so, that at first other hands are to be concerned with the execution of his plan and that, when the imbroglio has become sufficiently involved and .is far enough advanced, THE NATION WILL BE FORCED TO CALL AGAIN UPON HIM. This latter opinion may be too recherché, but that Pam did not resign in any way against his will seems to me unquestionable.

Now, as to your cousin,0 there's one thing I am willing to do, but the Presse, I assume, would not.254 All I could commit myself to would be one article a week on trade, finance, etc., in any one of the three countries, England, France and the United States of America, depending on which is INTERESTING This is also the most practicable form in which to attack Bonaparte. It is also a form which would permit me to have absolutely nothing to do with the

Presse politically. It seems to me that just now there is widespread ignorance, especially about French financial affairs and French economic conditions in general. The question is whether the subject will be of sufficient interest to the Presse, or RATHER, to its readers. They, of course, must be the best judges of that. For a weekly article of this kind I would ask £1 STERLING. Moreover, it would be necessary for me to have a few copies of the Presse beforehand so that I could see whether MY PRINCIPLES would at all permit me to work for the paper. HOWEVER THAT MAY BE, will you thank your cousin on my behalf for having remembered me in this connection.

[^1]: a his very self - b the ultimate aim of his whole life - c Max Friedländer



The work I am presently concerned with is a Critique of Economic Categories or, IF YOU LIKE, a critical exposé of the system of the bourgeois economy. It is at once an exposé and, by the same token, a critique of the system. I have very little idea how many sheets the whole thing will amount to. Had I the means, the time and the leisure to finish the whole thing off completely prior to placing it before the public, I would condense it a great deal, a method for which I have always had a predilection. But printed thus, in successive instalments—easier for readers to understand perhaps but certainly detrimental to the form—it is bound to be rather more diffuse. Nota bene: As soon as you know definitely whether or not the thing can be done in Berlin, kindly write to me, since if it's no go there I'll try Hamburg. A further point is that I must be paid by the publisher who takes the thing on—a stipulation over which it might come to grief in Berlin.

The presentation—the manner of it, I mean—is entirely scientific, hence unobjectionable to the police in the ordinary sense. The whole is divided into 6 books: 1. On Capital (contains a few introductory CHAPTERS). 2. On Landed Property. 3. On Wage Labour. 4. On the State. 5. International Trade. 6. World Market. I cannot, of course, avoid all critical consideration of other economists, in particular a polemic against Ricardo in as much as even he, qua bourgeois, cannot but commit blunders even from a strictly economic viewpoint. But generally speaking the critique and history of political economy and socialism would form the subject of another work, and, finally, the short historical outline of the development of economic categories and relations yet a third. Now



**[p. 271]**

I was greatly amused by your remarks about Rudolf Schramm. 3

Sad to say, a worthier Schramm, Conrad, brother of the above and one of my best friends, died of consumption in Jersey some 4 weeks ago. T h e death within the past few years of Weerth, Schramm and Dr Daniels has been a blow to their friends, amongst whom I was happy enough to count myself.

T h e r e are turbulent times in the offing. If I were merely to consult my own private inclinations, I would wish for another few years of superficial calm. T h e r e could, at any rate, be no better time for scholarly undertakings and, after all, what has happened over the last ten years must have increased any RATIONAL BEINCS contempt for the masses as for individuals to such a degree that 'odi profanum vulgus et arceo'b has almost become an inescapable maxim. However all these are themselves philistine ruminations which will be swept away by the first storm.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: T h e connection between the latest events in France 2 ' and the commercial crisis is, perhaps, apparent only to a few. It becomes EVIDENT, however, if one considers 1. THE REAL ECONOMICAL STATE PRODUCED IN FRANCE BY THE LAST CRISIS; 2. asks oneself and conscien- cieusement0 answers, why the attempted assassination brought forth the effects it did, effects which APPARENTLY STOOD IN NO PROPORTION WHATEVER, AND EVEN IN NO NECESSARY RELATION TO THE ALLEGED CAUSE.

[^2]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: a in Lassalle's letter to Marx of 10 February 1858 (see this volume, p. 272) - b I detest and repudiate the common people (Horace, Odes, III, I, 1). - c conscienti- ously



