---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "145. Engels to Marx. 24 February "
Page_Range: "309-311"
---

# 145. Engels to Marx. 24 February 



**[p. 274]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jgjg Published in English for the first time

145

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 24 February 1858

Dear Moor,

Enclosed a fiverb—unfortunately I couldn't shell out yesterday, otherwise you would have had it 24 hours earlier—and the article 'Brescia'. Now there are only 'Burmah' (half-finished—it's long job searching out the reports on the latest war289) and 'Bomarsund' to be done for B, and after that the two biographies. As to these I can soon get together what is needed on 'Beresford', but I'm in a quandary with 'Bülow' because I find it absolutely impossible to get hold of a good book on the wars of liberation.0 His resolution at Grossbeeren (he beat the French against Bernadotte's wishes) is to be commended and the victory at Dennewitz was a most remarkable one: 40,000 Prussians beat 70,000 Frenchmen.197

However I shall have another look round. Once the stuff for B is finished I shall go on to 'Cavalry'.

I don't agree with the idea of dropping Appleton—unless that is, we have to go to the Continent. I find the encyclopaedic course most useful and, after all, the thing is going so slowly that it could be done entirely at one's leisure were financial circumstances not

[^1]: a Cf. references to the 'mole' in Marx's The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte and 'Speech at the Anniversary of The People's Paper' (present edition, Vol. 11, p. 185 and Vol. 14, p. 656). - b Crossed outin theoriginal:'R/J 56641, Manchester, 16 Jan. 1857' (see next letter). - c the 1813-14 military campaigns against Napoleonic France





**[p. 275]**

In these circumstances the great Lassalle might be very useful. I trust he does what is necessary as regards the political economy, and likewise the Vienna Presse. He must have been very dilatory in the latter case, seeing that you had already written to him before about the financial article. I am keeping his letter here to show Lupus, since you've answered it anyway.

The historical irony whereby Mr Pam received his notice at the hands of Gibson and Bright is very pretty.287 What the Guardian has to say about it you will be able to see from the 3 copies I am sending off at the same time as this letter. Pam, by the way, evidendy intends to eliminate any possibility of his return—the prosecution of the wretched little publisher3 in London, the witch hunt that ended in the cellar in Birmingham (see day before yesterday's Sun, A CAPITAL HOAX) and other gestures of subservience to Bonaparte that crop up every day cannot fail in the long run to infuriate John Bull.

In Italy the oudook can't be so very bad after all. Admittedly there are complaints about the delay in recovering outstanding debts but on the whole it's no worse than here in the HOME TRADE. We don't have very many more overdue accounts than is usually the case in Italy. Indeed the fellows are starting to order more freely again. Admittedly our own article can't be regarded as an absolute criterion, but it nevertheless provides a few pointers. Business is still bad over there, of course, but not exceedingly so. But all that can still come.

The Bonapartists must have become tremendously nervous. At Fould's bal masqué 75 sergents de villeb were ON THE PREMISES dressed as dominos. See the Guardian.

Warmest regards to the whole FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Edward Truelove - b policemen



