---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "146. Engels to Marx. 1 March "
Page_Range: "311-312"
---

# 146. Engels to Marx. 1 March 



**[p. 146]**

ENGELS TO MARX .

IN LONDON

Manchester, 1 March 1858

Dear Marx,

On Wednesday, 24 February, I sent you a registered letter containing R/J 56641, Manchester, 16 Jan. 1857; a five-pound note. I trust that it reached you. If not, STOP PAYMENT at the Bank IMMEDIATELY. This evening I shall also send DIVERSE Guardians; another batch went off last Wednesday at the same time as the letter. In today's you'll find some interesting stuff about Or si ni.

The shabby way in which Pam, as he made his exit, unleashed all manner of political persecution—first Bernard and Allsop and now that poor devil of a PUBLISHER"—was quite a lark. But even this hasn't put John Bull off his TRULY BRITISH MINISTER,141 just a little grumbling here and there about the 2 cives Romani in Naples.290 VERILY, the fellow has left an offensive stench behind him.

In today's Guardian you will see that in Preston, etc., etc., SHORT TIME is still the order of the day. Will soon be general again. At present prices MANUFACTURERS are losing on most things, while spinners are just able to subsist, and to subsist well in the case of a few articles. As soon as rising prices CHECK demand (hitherto the fear of still higher prices has momentarily increased it), that too will cease and the fun begin all over again.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Edward Truelove



