---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "147. Marx to Engels. 2 March "
Page_Range: "312-314"
---

# 147. Marx to Engels. 2 March 



**[p. 147]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 March 1858

Dear Frederick,

I sent you by return a note acknowledging receipt of the £5. T h e scrawl contained nothing else save a few political comments, ALTOGETHER NOT 20 LINES.291 But all the same, I find it exceedingly irritating that the post office here should be taking an immediate interest in my correspondence. Not long ago I wrote to Collet, that most respectable of men, and the letter vanished. Complaints availed me nothing. I SHALL NOW WATCH THE PROGRESS OF POST OFFICE INTERFERENCE. If there is a 3rd CASE of this kind I shall proclaim the fact above my signature in the London press. T h e canaille are welcome to read what I write about POLITICS. But my PRIVATE AFFAIRS are not such that I would care to have any old German POST OFFICE SPY go poking his nose into them; 50 swine of various nationalities are, it seems, regularly employed as interpreters by the London cabinet noir?92 AT LEAST, THE URQUHARTITES SAY so.

T h e information I sent you recently about the STATE of TRADE IN ITALY, a n d Milan in particular, was taken from the T u r i n papers, which are well supplied with correspondents in that region. While it is, of course, in the interests of Turin to paint the situation in Austrian Italy in the blackest possible colours, the reports from Milan went into details which had the real ring of truth.—As regards the STATE of FRENCH TRADE, you should read the contribution from the Paris CORRESPONDENT in today's Times.* True, the chap now seems to be blaming the thing o n Orsini and the FRENCH COLONELS, mais c'est ridicule.b

I enclose a wretched scrawl by Pyat, Talandier a n d Co.,c which laddies couldn't rest for the fame accorded to Ledru-Rollin and Mazzini and Bernard, whereas they themselves had apparently been quite passed over by the French government. They believe that a revolution is in the offing and after all their 'activity' in London—Talandier had shouted himself as hoarse as quondam

[^1]: a The contribution datelined 'Paris, Saturday, Feb. 27, 6 p.m.', 77« Times, No. 22930, 2 March 1858. - b but it's ridiculous - c F. Pyat, A. Besson, A. Talandier, Letter to the Parliament and the Press (Marx seems to have used the French version of the letter).



T h e insolence and IMPUDENCE with which Pam has placed himself at the head of the liberal opposition and nominated himself an HONOURABLE GENTLEMAN OPPOSITE,2 IS TRULY WONDERFUL, but he can, of course, d o exactly what he pleases with a House of Commons of his own creation.

This seems to me somewhat STARTLING and not QUITE TRUSTWORTHY. T h e average period for the replacement of machinery is one important factor in explaining the multi-year cycle which has been a feature of industrial development ever since the consolidation of big industry.

What is Lupus u p to? Give him my regards.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Apropos. Can you tell me how often machinery has to be replaced in, say, your factory? Babbage maintains that in Manchester THE BULK OF MACHINERY IS RENOVATED on average EVERY 5 YEARS.*1

[^2]: a Derby's speech in the House of Lords of 1 March 1858 published in The Times, No. 22930, 2 March 1858. - b Ch. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, p. 285.



