---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "148. Engels to Marx. 4 March "
Page_Range: "314-317"
---

# 148. Engels to Marx. 4 March 

Another BATCH OF Guardians arrived today. 'Bidassoa' also received last week.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 arid in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

148

ENGELS T O MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 4 March 1858

Dear Moor,

So once again the cabinet noir292 has well and truly honoured you with its attentions. I had expected something of the sort but it's a bit steep to go and intercept letters. I think you would do better to have the address done in another hand, in which case they will only open the letters sent to you. I was expecting an acknowledgment from you and therefore took PARTICULAR care to ask our messenger daily and in so many words whether there were any letters for me—each time the answer was in the negative. And yet we have the asinine Félix Pyat announcing to the world qu'il n'y a pas de police politique proprement dite, en Angleterre." Rarely have I come across a more bungled concoction, style and all.293 Still the same old faith in the Constitution of 1848; one might almost be face to face with our own jackasses of the Imperial Constitution.296

And what a ghastly style! Après touth the idiots have achieved their aim and will, perhaps, earn themselves a cheap form of martyrdom. Cette bête dec Derby, falling straight into the trap like that, and allowing the riff-raff to have their way.

As to the question of machinery, it's difficult to say anything positive; at all events Babbaged is quite WRONG. The most reliable criterion is the PERCENTAGE by which a manufacturer writes down his

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a that properly^ speaking there are no political police in England - b However - c That ass - d Ch. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures.



from which I deduct V/2% for wear and £10,000 tear » 750

£9,250

Expenditure on repairs £100

Cost of machinery . £9,350

At the end of the 2nd year I deduct 71/2% [of] £10,000, and 7V2% [of] £100 » 757 10

£8,593 10

Expenditure on repairs » 306 10

etc. Now, I3V3 years is admittedly a long time in the course of which numerous bankruptcies and changes occur; you may enter other branches, sell your old machinery, introduce new improve- ments, but if this calculation wasn't more or less right, practice would have changed it long ago. Nor does the old machinery that has been sold promptly become old iron; it finds takers among the small spinners, etc., etc., who continue to use it. We ourselves have machines in operation that are certainly 20 years old and, when one occasionally takes a glance inside some of the more ancient and ramshackle CONCERNS up here, one can see antiquated stuff that must be 30 years old at least. Moreover, in the case of most machines, only a few of the components wear out to the extent that they have to be replaced after 5 or 6 years. And even after 15 years, provided the basic principle of a machine has not been superseded by new inventions, there is relatively litde difficulty in replacing worn out parts (I refer here to spinning and flyer frames), so that it is hard to set a definite term on the effective life of such machinery.- Again, over the last 20 years improvements in spinning machinery have not been such as to preclude the

[^1]: Present cost of entire machinery £8,900





**[p. 281]**

Babbage's assertion is so absurd that were it true, England's industrial capital must continually diminish and money simply be thrown away. A manufacturer who turns over his capital 5 times in 4 years, hence 6V4 times in 5 years, would, in addition to his average profit of 10%, have to earn annually a further 20% on approximately 3/4 of his capital (the machinery) if he was to recoup without loss his outlay on the old machinery—i.e. would have to make 25%. This would, of course, vastly increase the cost price of all articles—more, almost, than it would be increased by wages— in which case where is the advantage of machinery? Annual WAGES amount to perhaps Vs the cost of the machinery—undoubtedly less in the case of the smaller spinners and weavers, and wear and tear is supposed to amount to k—the thing is ludicrous. There is certainly not a single establishment in England in the regular LINE of big industry which replaces its machinery in 5 years. Anyone foolish enough to do so would go to the wall at the first CHANGE; the old machines, even though much inferior, would certainly have the advantage over the modern ones and would be able to produce much more cheaply, for the market follows not the people who charge 15% for wear and tear on every pound of twist, but those who charge only 6% (approx. 4/5 of an annual depreciation of 7'/2%) and hence sell at cheaper prices.

Ten to twelve years are enough to bring about changes in the character of the BULK of machinery, thereby necessitating its replacement to a greater or lesser extent. The period of 13'/3 years will vary, of course, depending on bankruptcies, breakage of essential parts where a repair would prove too expensive, and similar contingencies, so one could make it a bit shorter. But certainly not less than 10 years.

I had finished 'Burmah' when I was ' ompelled to make DIVERSE necessary ADDITIONS from another source. So I haven't done with it yet and the thing will have to wait until Tuesday. It will run to nearly 3 pages. There are still a few details to be looked up for 'Bomarsund'. On top of that I have to snatch whatever opportuni- ty I can, since library hours are so similar to office hours that I can't always get there. As soon as I've dealt with these wretched things—likewise 'Bülow' and 'Beresford', which suffer from the

