---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "150. Engels to Marx. 11 March "
Page_Range: "320-321"
---

# 150. Engels to Marx. 11 March 



**[p. 150]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 11 March 1858

Dear Moor,

Herewith something on 'Beresford' which I've been able to abstract from Napier." I couldn't find anything about his expedition to Buenos Aires at the beginning of the century, but it was a glorious one and would be worth investigating. He capitulated, RUMP AND STUMP, with the whole English force.298

'Bülow' is IN HAND. Ditto 'Cavalry'. Still some particulars to be looked up on 'Bomarsund'. In India there's another article brewing for which I shall be on the qui vive.

Charras' Campagne de 1815 is no longer obtainable in Brussels; said to be out of print and with no definite prospect of a reprint. In other words, Bonaparte has bought the publisher.b If you can run to ground a cheap (i. e. not exorbitant) copy in London, I'd like you to let me know; just now I'm studying this campaign.

I suspect that friend Dana is abridging our articles considerably, otherwise you couldn't possibly have miscalculated so badly. Go to Trübner's some time and have a look at the Cyclopaedia.

No news here, except that it's a ghastly winter; the weather changes I don't know how many times a day. Health very good. Am also taking iron.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

A bundle of Guardians goes off today. As often as not there's nothing from their foreign correspondents just now. In today's more statistics on the UNEMPLOYED.0

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, „ , , - , • • , . , . , , • , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula - b Alphonse Dürr - c This paragraph was added in pencil in the original.

[^4]: 11-194



