---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "157. Marx to Engels. 29 March "
Page_Range: "330-331"
---

# 157. Marx to Engels. 29 March 



**[p. 295]**

In haste—it's half past seven—and the office-boys are waiting to lock up.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

157

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

British Museum [London,] 29 March 1858

T h e £ 5 most gratefully received. Today a letter from Lassalle.a Duncker is prepared to publish my political economy on the following conditions. Every few months I am to supply instalments of 3 to 6 sheets (this was my suggestion). He is to have the right to cancel the arrangement at the third instalment. Indeed, no contract is to be definitely concluded until then. In the meantime he is to pay 3 fried- richsdors per sheet. (According to Lassalle, professors in Berlin get only 2) T h e first instalment b is to be READY at the end of May, i. e. the manuscript.

In my next I must let you have an outline of the first instalment so that you can tell me what you think of it. For the past two weeks I have again been VERY SICKLY and have been taking medicine for my liver. I have been much subject to relapses of late owing to prolonged work by night and, by day, a multitude of petty annoyances RESULTING FROM THE ECONOMICAL CONDITIONS OF MY DOMESTICITY.

[^1]: DEAR Frederic,

[^2]: a of 26 March 1858 - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.



