---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "159. Engels to Marx. 9 April "
Page_Range: "339-342"
---

# 159. Engels to Marx. 9 April 

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, , . 2P23 Published in English in full for the first time

159

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 April 1858

Dear Moor,

The study of your ABSTRACT of the first half'•instalmenta has greatly exercised me; IT IS A VERY ABSTRACT ABSTRACT INDEED—inevitably so, in view of its brevity,—and I often had to search hard for the dialectical transitions, particularly since ALL ABSTRACT REASONING is now completely foreign to me. The arrangement of the whole into 6 books could hardly be better and seems to me an excellent idea, although the dialectical transition from landed property to wage labour is not yet quite clear to me. The development of the monetary business, too, is really excellent, though again there are individual bits I can't quite make out, at least until I have looked up the historical background. However, I think that I shall get a better idea of the DRIFT when I've had the last part of capital in general, and shall then write to you at greater length about it. The abstract, dialectical tone of your synopsis will, of course, disappear in the development.

Yesterday I sent you two more Guardians. Now that the price has been reduced to Id, the chaps are evidently cutting down on all expenses such as foreign correspondents, etc. Their attempt to produce a FIRST-CLASS PROVINCIAL PAPER failed completely. Hence the dearth of foreign news and the rarity of contributions from Paris.

[^1]: K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.





**[p. 305]**

My prognostications that fluctuations in produce would be entirely dependent on the east and west winds and that, with MIDDLING ORLEANS COTTON above 6d, there could be no question of trade being either normal or brisk, have proved remarkably accurate.3 As regards cotton, the fulfilment of my first prognosti- cation will be apparent from the enclosed table which is a continuation of the one I sent you earlier on the price of Middling Orleans, and brings it up to date.b Sugar, coffee and tea have gone

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 202, 213, 235-36, 239-40. - •> Ibid., p. 205. The continuation of the table is not extant.





**[p. 306]**

In one week, 19-26 February, only 62 bales of cotton of all qualities arrived in Liverpool! Normally they are counted in thousands.

What's this about the 300 million francs which are admitted to have vanished? All I remember having read is that, instead of a surplus of 40 million, Magne has a deficit—but I don't know the details. It really is priceless. Now the 'prince impérial*' is also to be given his own household and a dotation—CASH MUST BE DEVIUSH SCARCE!

I hope your bilious trouble is better. Obviously all this excitation caused by the crisis is to blame. In the evenings I am sometimes plagued by toothache as a result of the weather; but nothing worse.

Kind regards to your wife a n d children.

F. E.

[^1]: Your

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 19 j 3 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a M stands for mille (Latin: thousand). - b Eugène, son of Napoleon III



