---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "160. Engels to Jenny Marx. 14 April "
Page_Range: "342-343"
---

# 160. Engels to Jenny Marx. 14 April 



**[p. 160]**

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX313

IN LONDON

Manchester, 14 April 1858

Dear Mrs Marx,

I trust that Moor is at last on the road to recovery and will soon be able to return unhampered to his labours on political economy.250 I was also plagued with toothache last week. By Sunday it had gone, only to return with added virulence this evening just as I was settling down to sort out some preliminary stuff on the conquest of Lucknowa for the Tribune. Whether I shall succeed in these circumstances seems very doubtful. At any rate I shall try and read up the subject this evening and if possible concoct something, even if not much, tomorrow midday while I'm at the office. But it would at any rate be a good idea if Moor were to have a sujet in petto so that, if the worst comes to the worst, there's something to send the fellows.

I still find working in the evenings very tiring and, if I go on for too long or for two evenings running, I get over-excited and suffer from insomnia, particularly when I've had a lot of writing to do during the day. And I also feel very stupid and lethargic in the evenings until I wake myself up by forcing myself to concentrate on some subject. My memory is better on the whole, although every day I still find that things I have done or heard the day before vanish so completely from my mind that they might never have happened, and it's only when I've been reminded of individual details that it all comes back to me. Otherwise I am physically strong and healthy again, able to stand up to strains and stresses and—sauf lec TOOTHACHE—to any kind of weather.

Lupus is still very lame and is having to spend more on CABS in one week than he usually does in a year. But he is improving visibly and in a week's time he'll probably again be able to stand a certain amount of walking. He sends everyone his best wishes.

How do you like the Bernard trial314? The French mouchards* and their worthy confrère MR Rogers are cutting a pretty figure.

[^1]: a F. Engels, The Fall of Lucknow'. - b subject up his sleeve - c save for the - d police spies



