---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "161. Engels to Marx. 22 April "
Page_Range: "343-344"
---

# 161. Engels to Marx. 22 April 



**[p. 308]**

I have today received from DEAR Harney 3 more Independent^ from which it transpires that his arch-enemy, Seigneur Godfrey, has begun a fresh libel suit against him.237 The man will soon be thinking himself as 'greet' as the 'greet'c Lassalle.

'OUR FAITHFUL ALLY"* is now weighing on English commerce like a nightmare. Nobody wants to speculate or buy more than his immediate requirements because the whole of Philistia is expecting war, revolution or even more oudandish things in France.

Very best wishes to the girls and Moor,

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

161

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 22 April 1858

Dear Moor,

I wrote to your wife last week and the following day sent an article on Lucknowc and also Guardians (or cuttings, I don't remember exactly). I hope everything arrived safely. 2 more Guardians go off today. Russell's report in Tuesday's Times1 did not have the makings of an article, but I'm saving it up until the arrival of the next mail; this is sure to bring the last part of the Lucknow story, when the whole thing can be polished off all at one go—with, I hope, the help of Campbell's despatches as well. Meanwhile I have thrown myself into 'Cavalry' again—shall leave

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a 'Trial of Simon Bernard', The Morning Post, No. 26298, 13 April 1858. - •> The Jersey Independent - c Engels has grauss-—South-German for gross (great). - d Napoleon III - e F. Engels, 'The Fall of Lucknow'. - f [W. H. Russell,] 'The Capture of Lucknow', The Times, No. 22972, 20 April 1858.



