---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "162. Marx to Engels. 29 April "
Page_Range: "344-346"
---

# 162. Marx to Engels. 29 April 



**[p. 309]**

open bits of the historical section for the present until I can unearth the relevant sources, and shall get on with the tactical side. The article will probably take up 10 or 12 of my long double pages, and maybe more.

The affaire Bernard314 will greatly mortify Monsieur Bonaparte and make quite an impression on the refugee crapauds in London. James' speech, by the way, was feeble and décousu3 and as usual old Campbell's summing up went against the PRISONER. The old donkey is vexed at losing the chance of an interesting legal case when he could have presided over 15 other judges.

The revelations made by Cavour and La Marmorab about their relations with Cavaignac and the latter's fear of Austria315 will be of interest to the républicains purs. The more that comes to light about the National's period of supremacy, the more pitiful it seems.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

162

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 29 April 1858

DEAR Frederick,

My long silence can be explained in one word—inability to write. This existed (AND TO SOME DEGREE EXISTS STILL) not only IN THE

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: LITERARY, b u t IN THE LITERAL SENSE OF THE WORD. T h e f e w o b l i g a t o r y articles for the Tribune" were dictated to my wife, but even that was only possible by APPLYING STRONG STIMULI. Never before have I had such a violent attaque of liver trouble and FOR SOME TIME there was a

[^3]: a disjointed - b C. B. Cavour's speech of 16 April 1858 in the Chamber of Representatives of the Kingdom of Piedmont, The Times, No. 22973, 21 April 1858; A. F. La Marmora's speech of 17 April 1858 in the Chamber of Representatives of the Kingdom of Piedmont, The Times, No. 22974, 22 April 1858. - c K. Marx, 'The French Trials in London', "The Financial Position of France', 'Mr Disraeli's Budget', 'The English Alliance'.





**[p. 310]**

Your letters and Guardians arrived safely. A book has appeared by Louis Blanc on the revolution of 1848.c

Evinces the most candid admiration for the 'petit'd which, or so he says, is what the workers call him. If read carefully, however, it makes the fellow look an ass for it shows that on every crucial occasion the workers acted without his knowledge or consent and generally returned him sentiment for 'sentiment', taking the view that they had thereby paid the oracle of Luxembourg his FULL

PRICE.316

The movement for the emancipation of the serfs in Russia strikes me as important in so far as it indicates the beginning of an internal development that might run counter to the country's traditional foreign policy. Herzen, of course, has discovered afresh that 'liberty' has emigrated from Paris to Moscow.

Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Friend Bangya, AS IT SEEMS, has been caught out by Sefer Pasha's sone engaging in unauthorised correspondence with Philipson, the Russian general. It is said that he HAS BEEN SHOT together with a number of his Hungarian and Polish accomplices.3

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: * first of all - b Hence these tears (Terence, Andria, I, i, 99). - c L. Blanc, 1848. Historical Revelations - d the litde one - e Prince Ibrahim Karabatir



