---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "163. Engels to Marx. 30 April "
Page_Range: "346-347"
---

# 163. Engels to Marx. 30 April 



**[p. 163]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 30 April 1858 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

If travel you must, why not travel to Manchester, THATS EASY ENOUGH. Should the note I sent you yesterday have already disappeared, ce qui serait bien possible,' let me know; for 21/- you can now get an 8-day RETURN TICKET FIRST CLASS, and then, of course, you just disregard the RETURN. I shall try and arrange for a spare bed at my house, which should be possible for a few days, anyhow. For the rest we shall see. If you still have the money for the journey, come up straight away. We shall immediately send off to your wife anything you borrow from her; I've had no time to get a POST OFFICE ORDER today. I shall give the necessary instructions when I get home this evening. Come straight to No 6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road. If you don't actually leave tomorrow evening (there's a train at about 5 o'clock), let me know on Monday morning when you are arriving and I'll pick you up at the station—but say whether by NORTH WESTERN or GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY.

If you are arriving on Sunday, telegraph me tomorrow—it costs 2/6d for 20 words excluding the address. Send the telegram to my house.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the Original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a which is quite possible



