---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "166. Engels to Jenny Marx. 11 May "
Page_Range: "348-349"
---

# 166. Engels to Jenny Marx. 11 May 



**[p. 313]**

and party comrade. While Conrad was still alive your own friends were surprised at the indifference you showed towards his financial circumstances.

In so far as I had anything to say about the disposal of Conrad's effects, I have said it to his only possible executor, Mr Harney.

As to my 'sense of justice', which has nothing whatever to do with the case, you may perhaps have occasion to become better acquainted with it some day in Germany.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

166

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX

Manchester, 11 May 1858

Dear Mrs Marx,

Moor has been out riding for two hours today and feels so well after it that he's waxing quite enthusiastic about the thing. He has left town and gone home, and has asked me to drop you a line about that fool Cluss.a He thinks it might be a good thing for you to go and see Pfänder, who would probably elicit something from him. The main thing is that Monsieur Cluss should come up here, for we have got to know how we stand with him, and either he must declare himself IN A SATISFACTORY MANNER or else we must break with him. What good is the ass to us if he's so unreliable as first to come to you, his heart brimful and overflowing, stay for 3 hours with no other apparent object than to get back on to the old footing again, and then suddenly write you a letter as confused as it is ill-bred in which he retracts? We're only sorry that, in the midst of what is a far from rosy spell, such dolts should come and add to your troubles.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 374-75, 571.



