---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "167. Engels to Jenny and Laura Marx. 11 May "
Page_Range: "349-350"
---

# 167. Engels to Jenny and Laura Marx. 11 May 

If at all possible, see that the man comes up here so that we at least have the satisfaction of telling him exactly what we think of him.

I hope that Moor will persevere with his riding, for if he does he'll be able to write again in a week. Lupus' leg is much better too.

Your devoted

F. Engels

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, . . _ . . . . jgjg Published in English tor the first time

167

ENGELS TO JENNY AND LAURA MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 May 1858

Dear Jenny and Laura,

I cannot allow this note to go off to your mama without thanking you for the two lovely portraits which you asked Moor to bring me. They have found a temporary home on the CHIMNEY-PIECE in front of the looking-glass, but in a day or two will be given a splendid place of their own on the wall.

I hope Mr Schleiden suits you all right3; the man's far more solemn than you are, and I only hope you won't see fit to imitate him.

Dai ritratti vedo con piacere che avete molto grandito tutte le due e che, benchè siate grande signorine adesso, vi sono sempre le vecchie faccie piene di franchezza ed ingenuità; e credete pure che anch' io per voi sard sempre il vecchiob

Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time a Probably a reference to the book: M. J. Schleiden, Die Pflanze und ihr Leben. - b I see with pleasure from your portraits that you have both grown a lot and that, although you are now grown-up young girls, your faces are still as frank and artless as of old; and you must believe me still to be your old



