---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "169. Marx to Engels. 31 May "
Page_Range: "352-354"
---

# 169. Marx to Engels. 31 May 



**[p. 169]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 31 May 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

DEAR Frederick,

It took me a week to acclimatise myself again; moreover, the abrupt discontinuation of riding did me no good to begin with. Not until this very day have I at last begun to feel as fit as I did on the day I left Manchester. I am now IN WORKING ORDER and shall at once start getting the stuff ready for publication.3 All I wrote last week was 2 articles for the Tribune}* The rest of the time I kept constantly on the move, since the feeling of heaviness in my head and trouble with my bowels made me fear a relapse.

Ad vocemc Cluss. Before leaving, this young man visited Schapper again. When he got back from my house the worthy fellow discovered to his dismay that he had brought something back with him from Paris, viz. a chancre with all sorts of nasty secondary symptoms. He took to his bed and this, he told Schapper, was the reason for his withdrawal from the civilised world.

Ad vocem Pélissier. What we jokingly suggested in Manchester, namely that Pélissier would promptly enter into relations with the Orléans, has now happened IN REAL GOOD EARNEST, and become the talk of the town here.

During my absence a book by Maclaren covering the entire history of CURRENCY came out in Londond; to judge by the excerpts in The Economist it is FIRST-RATE.6 The book isn't in the library' yet—nothing ever turns up there until months after publication. I, of course, am bound to read it before writing my treatise. So I sent my wife to the PUBLISHER8 in the City. To our dismay, however, we discovered that it costs 9/6d—more than the whole of our

[^1]: What do you think of Bonaparte's thirst for confiscation?319

[^2]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - b 'Lord Canning's Proclamation and Land Tenure in India' and 'The Financial Manoeuvres of Bonaparte.—Military Despotism' - c As regards - d J. Maclaren, A Sketch of the History of the Currency - = The Economist, No. 768, 15 May 1858, pp. 536-37. - f of the British Museum - s Groombridge

[^3]: 12-194





**[p. 318]**

Don't you think you might have sufficient material to d o something general on the STATE OF THE BRITISH FORCES IN INDIA and also something conjectural for Friday? I T WOULD BE A GREAT BOON FOR ME since reading over my own manuscript 3 will take me the better part of a week. T h e damnable part of it is that my manuscript (which in print would amount to a hefty volume) is a real hotchpotch, much of it intended for much later sections. So I shall have to make an index briefly indicating in which notebook and on which page to find the stuff I want to work on first.

I have at long last written to Lassalle.b You must grant me absolution for the plaudits I was obliged to accord Heraclitus, the Dark Philosopher. In a few unobtrusive asides—for praise is taken seriously only when offset by censure—I have to some extent, if very piano-piano, hinted at the real shortcomings of the entreprise. Tomorrow or the day after I shall be getting some more Bangya n u m b e r s / 2 of which I shall send to Manchester, 1 for you and 1 for Lupus. Apropos, in an issue of the Tribune I see that Pulszky is endeavouring to forestall the nauseous REVELATIONS by represent- ing Bangya as Metternich's spy and as one who betrayed General Stein.d So statesman Blind, WHILE GIVING A TESTIMONIUM PAUPERTATIS TO KOSSUTH, THE ILLUSTRIOUS GOVERNOR OF HUNGARY-, in the Adver- tiser, nevertheless found himself obliged to invite him in so many words to make a 'counter-statement'. Kossuth, OF COURSE, held his tongue.

How is Gumpert progressing in the noble art of equitation? As for me, the pity of it is that I always have to break off just when I'm again making enough progress to take an interest in the thing.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Economic Manuscripts of 1857-58 - b See this volume, pp. 315-16. - c 'Recent Treachery in Circassia', The Free Press, No. 16, 12 May 1858. - d [F. Pulszky,] 'From Our Own Correspondent. London, April 23, 1858', New-York Daily Tribune.No. 5319, 8 May 1858.



