---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "170. Marx to Engels. 7 June "
Page_Range: "354-355"
---

# 170. Marx to Engels. 7 June 



**[p. 170]**

MARX T O ENGELS 2 0

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 June 1858

DEAR Frederick,

Enclosed 2 Bangya numbers, 3 ONE FOR YOU, THE OTHER FOR Lupus. Have received from you 1. letter with the POST OFFICE NOTE; 2. SECOND LETTER; 3. ARTICLE FOR THE TRIBUNE (VERY AMUSING ONE. TOO ). Did not acknowledge receipt before because each day 1 was expecting the 2 Bangya numbers; also a lot of PRIVATE TROUBLES which took u p my time.

Enclosed a letter from Lassalle.c It's an extremely odd business. I cannot reply until I have your own and Lupus' opinion. So I should like you to consult together at once and send m e your avisà

without delay. My own view is that Lassalle should not engage in a duel with that ass Fabrice and that, even from the standpoint of the duel, the assault by the two gentlemen from the 'High Court' has p u t any duelling OUT OF THE QUESTION. GENERALLY, it is my view— though having to decide whether or not the duel as such accords with principle seems to m e ludicrous, OF COURSE—that in the PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES, AT THIS PARTICULAR JUNCTURE, etc., etc., in contemporary history, members of the revolutionary party may respond to their PRIVATE ENEMIES with clubs, kicks a n d punches, but not engage in duels. But it would seem to m e totally wrong if, after h e has come out so categorically against all duelling, Lassalle WOULD ALLOW HIMSELF

Schapper came to see me yesterday. Told me, inter alia, that friend Caussidière, arriving drunk in a disreputable alley in New York one evening, apparently attacked a wench with his stick; h e r yells attracted half a dozen LOAFERS who promptly set upon Caussidière and beat him almost to death. T h e fat lout was PICKED UP unconscious by the police early next morning and it was 6 weeks before h e was fit enough to be u p and about again.

Seiler h a d a CASE [attack] of paralysis; at death's door for

[^1]: TO BE BULLIED by feudal GOSSIP.

[^2]: a 'Recent Treachery in Circassia', The Free Press, No. 16, 12 May 1858. - b F. Engels, 'The British Army in India'. - c Lassalle's letter to Marx of 4 June 1858 - d opinion

[^3]: 12«



