---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "171. Engels to Marx. 9 June "
Page_Range: "355-356"
---

# 171. Engels to Marx. 9 June 



**[p. 320]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, , , . , , . ,- .• , • r ., <• Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English m full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, f l r s t t , m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

171

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 9 June 1858

Dear Moor,

I return Lassalle's letter herewith.3 Borchardt had already told me on Saturday with a look of triumph that our little Jew Braun had been in a brawl. It's extremely useful to know these details. As for our opinion, it's as clear as day that, by making so despicable an attempt on a person's life, both the gentlemen, the Intendantur- rat no less than the Assessor, have adopted in toto the standpoint of the bludgeon, and that the only duel one might engage in with such laddies has already taken place during the brawl itself. If 2 chaps waylay a third and both of them set on him, I don't believe that any duelling code in the world would permit a subsequent duel with such riff-raff. If Mr Fabrice intended forcibly to provoke a duel by means of the horse-whip affair, either Mr Bor mann ought to have looked on purely passively as a witness, or his presence was altogether superfluous. But when two men simultaneously set upon one, then we are dealing with canailleh for whom honour and FAIR PLAY do not exist and who have given proof that A FAIR DUEL cannot be fought with them. Indeed one would run the risk of being treacherously murdered.

So much for my own and Lupus' opinion, if we are to take the duelling code as the basis in law.

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 319. - b rabble



