---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "172. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 10 June "
Page_Range: "356-358"
---

# 172. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 10 June 



**[p. 321]**

This apart we share your view that 1. duels are, on the whole, untimely for revolutionaries just now and 2. that Lassalle, having declared himself unequivocally against duelling 'on principle', would be greatly discredited were he now to engage in a duel.

So far as we are concerned, therefore, you can safely go ahead and tell our Ephraim Artful3 not to fight but rather tranquilly restore his 'unshakable determination' with the help of the botde, take the moon by the horns again as soon as may be and risk annihilation for the hundred and first time. As to the discovery that he appears to possess an adequate store of vanity, silence is, I think, the best form of congratulation.

Did you read the story about Fould's sonb? He decamped to London with Mademoiselle Valérie' of the Gymnase and 1,600,000 francs. His old man d wrote to Pélissier and told him that he should au cas de besoin, user d'autorité.e Pélissier invited the loving couple to déjeuner1 and told them: Je vous donne ma bénédiction* and wrote to the old man: Que voulez-vous? Les jeunes gens seront toujours de jeunes gens!h Whereat old Fould became the laughing-stock of Paris.

Your

F. E.

172

London, 10 June 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

You would have had an immediate answer to your letter, but it seemed to me advisable—not in order to formulate my own views

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, ,. , , . .. , r , r- 1913 Published in English for the lirst

[^2]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE82

[^3]: IN BERLIN

[^4]: a Lassalle - b Gustave Eugène Fould - c Wilhelmine Joséphine Simonin - d Achille Fould - e if need be, exercise his authority - f lunch - 8 I give you my blessing. -

[^5]: h What do you expect? Young people are all alike.





**[p. 322]**

but because très faciunt collegium3—to put the CASE to Engels and Lupus in Manchester and obtain their opinion. Since their views and my own coincide at every point, you may regard the following as our unanimous OPINION.

1. From the standpoint of the duel. It is as clear as day that by their despicable attack in the street the two gentlemen, the Intendantur- rat and the Assessor, have adopted in toto the standpoint of the bludgeon and that the only duel which one might engage in with such laddies has already taken place during the brawl itself. If 2 chaps waylay a third and both of them set on him, we don't believe that any duelling code in the world would permit a subsequent duel with such riff-raff. If, by flourishing a horse-whip, Mr Fabrice intended forcibly to provoke a duel, either Mr Bormann ought to have looked on purely passively as a witness, or his presence was altogether superfluous. But when two men simul- taneously set upon one, and one of them actually operates IN THE REAR of the person attacked, then we are dealing with canailleb who have given proof that A FAIR DUEL cannot be fought with them.

2. Principle of the duel. We don't believe that, generally speaking, an affair as relative as a duel can be subsumed under the category good or bad. That duelling as such is not rational there can be no doubt. Nor that it is a relic of a bygone stage of civilisation. However, a concomitant of the one-sidedness of bourgeois society is that, in opposition to the latter, certain feudal forms maintain the rights of the individual. The most striking proof of this is to be found in the United States where duelling is a civil right. Individuals may become locked in a mutual conflict so insupporta- ble that a duel seems to them the only solution. However such deadly tension is not IN FACT possible vis-à-vis an indifferent person such as an Intendanturrat, an Assessor, or a lieutenant. This would demand a significant personal relationship. Otherwise a duel is an utter farce. It is invariably a farce when performed in deference to so-called 'public opinion'.

3. We therefore regard duelling as being purely dependent on circumstances; hence recourse may be had to it as an exceptional pis aller" in exceptional circumstances. In the CASE under discus- sion, however, all the circumstances argue quite emphatically against it, even if the attack in the street had not put it ALTOGETHER

4. The really decisive factor is that you are not only opposed to all duelling on principle but have proclaimed this principle, and in

[^1]: OUT OF THE QUESTION.

[^2]: a three constitute a panel - b rabble - c evnedient



