---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "173. Marx to Engels. 2 July "
Page_Range: "358-360"
---

# 173. Marx to Engels. 2 July 



**[p. 323]**

5. In the case under discussion, a duel would have absolutely no meaning save as the observance of a conventional formality recognised by certain privileged classes. Our party must resolutely set its face against these class ceremonies and reject with the most cynical contempt the presumptuous demand that we submit to them. The present state of affairs is far too serious to permit of your consenting to such puerilities and it would be sheer puerility to engage in a duel with Mr Fabrice because he is an 'Intendanturrat' and belongs to the clique qualified to fight duels, whereas if e.g. a tailor or cobbler were to set about you in the street, you would simply hand him over to the courts without any infringement of 'honour'. In the case under consideration you would not be fighting a duel with Fabrice, an individual who is indifferent to you, but with the 'Intendanturrat'—which would be an absurd manoeuvre. In general, the fellows' insistence that differences with them must be settled by a duel as a privilege due to them—and all FASHIONABLE duels fall under this head—should be laughed to scorn. To acknowledge this claim would be altogether counter-revolutionary.

I have given you our view in nuce.* We shall be interested to hear how the affair progresses.

K. M.

173

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 2 July 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, H averstock Hill Dear Engels,

[^1]: Salut. Y o u r

[^2]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: The delay in acknowledging your 'Cavalry'320 due to great domestic TROUBLE. For weeks our youngest childb has been

[^5]: a in a nutshell - b Eleanor Marx





**[p. 324]**

You will remember that, while our friend Schramm was in Jersey, I secured him the position of correspondent to an American paper. Now that he's dead and after he had dunned them on several occasions, his fee of SOME 6 POUNDS has arrived and has, of course, fallen to Mr Rudolf3 as pocket-money.

Otherwise nothing new here. That little London German rag once run by Gumpert has, I believe, now fallen to 'united democracy', sub auspiciish of the great Blind under the title Neue

Welt.c

I assume you have read the statements made in the Star b y Mr Türr and by the Hungarian émigrés in Constantinople. If not, I shall send you The Free Press* Meanwhile Kossuth still remains obdurately silent. Our excerpt from Bangya's story has appeared in the Tribune? The row in New York will force Kossuth to speak. Thus I may have to come right out into the open in this matter. Pulszky had de longue main1 provided a loophole in the Tribune when he described Bangya as a former spy of Metternich's (!).g

Klapka, whom I met for a moment or two at Freiligrath's, remarked drily of Bangya: 'Finis coronal opus.'*1 He seems to be very blasé about Kossuth. Is presently dabbling in Turkish shares.

I have had no word from Ephraim Artful1 for a fortnight. Being convinced, OF COURSE, that there was small likelihood of my letter being put to discreet use by him, I worded it with the utmost caution so THAT IT WILL BE EXTREMELY DIFFICULT FOR HIM TO ABUSE IT. Apart from the special CIRCUMSTANCES of the CASE, concerning which I gave him your opinion pretty well verbatim, I censured duelling only in so far as it is claimed as privilege of caste by fellows who believe that their insults must be punished otherwise than those of a tailor, cobbler, etc. The revolutionary thing to do, I told him, when confronted with such inane presumption and laddies of this ilk, was to adopt the 'standpoint of the lout' and the 'code of the bludgeon'. On the other hand, in reply to Ephraim's pedantry, I said that duelling was among the things Aristotle described as being 'indifferent' and which one could either take or leave as one

[^1]: Herewith two letters from New York.321

[^2]: 3 Rudolf Schramm - b under the auspices - c presumably Die Neue Zeit - d I. Tiirr, 'To the Editor of the Presse d'Orient', The Free Press, No. 18, 30 June 1858. - c K. Marx, 'A Curious Piece of History*. - f long ago - 8 [F. Pulszky,] 'From Our Own Correspondent. London, April 23,' 1858', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5319, 8 May 1858. - h 'The end crowns the work.' - ' Ferdinand Lassalle



