---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "176. Engels to Marx. 16 July "
Page_Range: "366-368"
---

# 176. Engels to Marx. 16 July 

LIFE-INSURANCE SOCIETY. Even were I to seek to reduce expenditure to the utmost—e.g. take the children away from school, move into a wholly working-class lodging, get rid of the maids, live on potatoes—not even the auction of my household goods would suffice to satisfy the creditors in the vicinity and ensure an unhampered removal to some hidey-hole. The SHOW of RESPECTABILITY which has so far been kept up has been the only means of avoiding a collapse. I for my part wouldn't care a damn about living in Whitechapel,322 provided I could again at last secure an hour's peace in which to attend to my work. But in view of my wife's condition just now such a metamorphosis might entail dangerous consequences, and it could hardly be suitable for growing girls.

I HAVE NOW MADE A CLEAN BREAST OF IT and I assure you that it has cost me no small effort to do so. But enfin,1 I must speak my mind to somebody. I know that you yourself can do nothing to help. All I ask is your opinion on WHAT TO DO. I would not wish my worst enemy to have to wade through the QUAGMIRE in which I've been trapped for the past two months, fuming the while over the innumerable vexations that are ruining my intellect and destroying my capacity for work.

Salut.

Your

176

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 16 July 1858 Dear Moor,

It is very decent of you to have laid your difficulties plainly before me. Obviously there is need for immediate action. By my

[^1]: K. M. I shall send you the things you ask for.b

[^2]: First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a after all - b See this volume, p. 326.



In this way, or so it seems to me, you would be covered to the extent that you could, at a pinch, wait until it's time to draw your next bill. But in view of your wife's state of health even more will be needed, of course, and unfortunately I can't manage it. I can't even step across to Watts here in connection with his Provident Institution as I've fallen out with the fellow. However he only has a BRANCH-OFFICE up here; the head-o FFic E is in London and you can look it up in any DIRECTORY. The business is called the PEOPLES PROVIDENT ASSURANCE SOCIETY AND LIFE AND EQUITABLE INSTITUTION Freiligrath will easily get hold of a prospectus, TERMS, etc., for you and if there is anything to be done, which I doubt, he could also set the matter in train.

Though I've racked my brains I can think of no other method of raising money in England. It seems to me that the moment has come for you to have a go at your matera or one or other of the Dutchmen.b Ultimately it is a question of wiping the slate clean and making A FRESH START; all this business of LOANS merely puts matters off and ultimately leads to an even worse crisis, quite apart from all the money—what with FEES, etc.—and time that is expended in attempts to raise the cash. Moreover, an acceptance on my part anticipates the money which I would otherwise have been able to send you over a period in small amounts and, although a lump sum is worth more to you than the ODD five-pound note now and again, this will certainly mean a corresponding loss of regular income.

You must really cast aside any reservations—s'il y en auraitc—in this case and attempt a coup. It's a question of finding a further

[^1]: a Henriette Marx - b the Philips family, Marx's Dutch relations - c if there are any



