---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "177. Marx to Engels. 20 July "
Page_Range: "368-369"
---

# 177. Marx to Engels. 20 July 

£50 or so and I can see absolutely no way of getting it other than through your relations.

Meanwhile I shall mull the thing over lor a couple of days and see if anything occurs to me. At all events it would be as well to burn this correspondence so that the matter remains between ourselves.

Your

F. E,

If absolutely necessary I would accept £20 at 3 months and £20 at 6; anything shorter wouldn't do. Interest on top of this, so you would have £40 net.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

177

MARX TO ENGELS20

London, 20 July 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

When your letter arrived on Saturday I did not reply immediately because I first wanted to see what response I got to another 'ATTEMPT' before taking advantage of the authorisation you gave me. On Monday, however, I received an answer in the negative. Hence any further delay seemed impracticable. Accord- ingly to Freiligrath. Today he informed me in writing that the thing could be proceeded with on the TERMS you proposed, but not until 3 August since his USURER was unable to go ahead any earlier. I shall therefore write and tell him to put the business in hand by 3 August.

On Saturday I had a long letter from my mother. For I had asked Mrs Liebknecht, who was going to Germany, to take the old girl a portrait of our youngest child3 with a brief note in which I

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Eleanor Marx



