---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "178. Marx to Engels. 25 July "
Page_Range: "369-370"
---

# 178. Marx to Engels. 25 July 



**[p. 334]**

mentioned my being frequently ill but said nothing about o u r other circumstances. 24 T h e old girl's letter is such as to suggest the possibility of a meeting between us a few weeks hence. IF SO, I SHOULD ARRANGE THINGS. But I mustn't be too pressing IN THIS RESPECT. Otherwise she will promptly draw BACK.

T h a n k you for the Tribune article.325 More tomorrow.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, . , . , . , „ , igj3 Published m English in lull for the first time

178

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 July [1858]

Dear Engels,

From the enclosed letter of Freiligrath you will see that further DIFFICULTIES have arisen. But the 'new' terms seem to me au fond3

better than the old, for though payment is nominally required in 3 months it need, IN FACT, only be made in 6 and the cost is 10% less.

Kindly reply at once ONE WAY OR THE OTHER. T h e matter is PRESSING. If it can be arranged in this way I shall, AT ANY RISK, immediately send my wife to a nearby seaside resort for a couple of weeks and, in the meantime, see what I can fix u p with my mater—after the more unruly creditors have been placated, OF COURSE.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a in the main



