---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "179. Marx to Engels. 8 August "
Page_Range: "370-372"
---

# 179. Marx to Engels. 8 August 



**[p. 179]**

MARX TO ENGELS326

IN MANCHESTER

London, 8 August 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

If I haven't written before, this was because it wasn't till yesterday that the matter was decided for certain and, indeed, in the affirmative. Every time I sat down to write to you, another letter arrived from the City to say there was nothing doing and that I should try and carry out the transaction with SOMEBODY ELSE. However, I wanted to tell you something definite ONE WAY OR THE OTHER. After he had negotiated with 6 different USURERS, and every time the fellows went back on their promise when it came to the point, Freiligrath eventually discounted the bill with his own tailor, after he had agreed to act as collateral. He had, ab initio,3 made it payable at his own bank. The old chap went to a great deal of trouble over the matter, even to the extent of taking certain steps not altogether in keeping with his 'professional' status. So if you should happen to write to him, give him a little PAT on the back, an action to which he is not wholly impervious. The bill has been deposited with Freiligrath himself. The tailor declares that he is prepared to renew it, whatever the circumstances. But he would prefer to receive £20 in November so that he would only have to make out a new bill for the remaining £20 payable in January. (After receiving your letter,327 I immediately informed Freiligrath that the thing could not be proceeded with unless there was a certainty of renewal.)

To my alarm I saw from your letter that you were ill again, and in the circumstances it was all the more embarrassing to me to have ANNOYED you. Please write by return saying how you are, or else get Dr Gumpert to write.

After receiving the money, I promptly paid off as much as possible and yesterday sent my wife to Ramsgate, since there was not another day to be lost. She really is extraordinarily unwell. If Ramsgate isn't too expensive, and she is thus able to have several weeks of sea bathing, I believe all will soon be RIGHT again.

[^1]: a from the start





**[p. 336]**

MEANWHILE I shall see if there's anything to be done with my mother. How I should answer the old girl in regard to my relations with Prussia is a very ticklish point. It's just possible that she might fork out if she thought my inheritance was under threat from the authorities. But again it's just possible—since she seems to me to be making her will—that she might in that case put everything in the care of the Dutchman,3 which wouldn't suit me at all. Que faire dans cette situation?*1 She writes saying her days are numbered, but I believe that's just a manner of speaking. She probably wanted me to invite her to London, as indeed I would certainly have done had my time not been precious to me just now. For the past 2 months I have hardly been able to work, and the Duncker business is becoming urgent.c

I have written a lot for the Tribune of late so as to replenish my account a bit, but I'm getting damnably short of material. India isn't my department. Cherbourg328 would have provided me with ample opportunity for political epigrams, except that I'm too ignorant of military matters to give the thing the proper depth. To me—though it's an altogether subjective opinion, not to say a prejudice—Cherbourg would seem to be no more than a DODGE, like all Boustrapa's40 grand doings, a mere SLEIGHT OF HAND. At any rate, the Moniteur, no less, contained certain ominous hints to the effect that the military authorities are by no means happy about the choice of the spot and have raised a host of circumstantial objections to the lay-out of the works. It is, furthermore, FAR FROM BEING FINISHED and, in its present state, represents rather what's to be than what is. The only thing that is completely finished is the big equestrian statue of Napoleon. In Central India, or so it seems to me, the fall of Gwalior settles the matter. The Indian papers are all very hostile to Campbell and critical of his 'tactics'.

Enclosed a letter from Lassalle.d Ephraim Artful is a curious fellow. He demands of me AN IMMENSE DEAL OF DISCRETION and puts on a great show of secrecy, yet the whole scrawle appears substantially in the Kölner Zeitungl There's a vein of absurd grandiloquence running through the man's letters. 'Then I addressed, etc., a trenchantly cutting memoir, etc' 'I set Böckh and Humboldt in motion.' Humboldt wrote 'a fulminating letter'. 'I myself made a complaint direct to the Prince' couched in the bluntest German.' 'Truly foudroyant9 arraignment of the ministerh.' 'Urgent plea.' 'In

[^1]: a Lion Philips - b What's to be done in this situation? - c Marx means the preparation for the press of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - d Lassalle's letter to Marx of 23 July 1858 - e See this volume, pp. 321-23. - f William, Prince of Prussia - s crushing - h Ferdinand von Westphalen



