---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "180. Engels to Marx. 10 August "
Page_Range: "372-373"
---

# 180. Engels to Marx. 10 August 



**[p. 337]**

absolute confidence.' 'My biggest pistol.' 'Hopeless.' 'Utmost secrecy and discretion.' 'If that's not sauce for the gander, etc'

Our friend Bürgers will soon be out of prison again now. His main idea, it seems, is to play father to Daniels' children and to that end, first take over the post of bedfellow to Mrs Daniels. The latter has, however, written to Linaa saying that Bürgers isn't to be compared with her husband.

Apropos, Lupus will be interested to hear that little Jenny has received THE FIRST GENERAL PRIZE IN THE FIRST CLASS (which also includes the English prize), and little Laura the second. They are the youngest in the class. Jenny also got the prize for French.

Salut. I hope to hear some good news about your STATE OF HEALTH.

Your

K. M.

The Telegraph (enclosed) is also to be kept.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

180

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 10 August 1858 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Back at the office again since yesterday. I wasn't ill, by the way, merely wounded SURGICALLY and, though the wound is not yet quite healed, the purpose has been achieved. In no circumstances shall I be in a condition to do a Tribune article before next week.

How's the Appleton affair going? You once wrote saying you were enclosing two letters from America,321 but you forgot to do so. Did they have any bearing on it? In a fortnight's time I shall probably be going to the seaside, where I might be able to get down to some hard work on the thing.

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Caroline Schöler



