---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "181. Marx to Engels. 13 August "
Page_Range: "373-375"
---

# 181. Marx to Engels. 13 August 



**[p. 338]**

Lupus and I send our hearty congratulations to the two girlsb

on their achievements. The old chap was delighted about it. His leg is still not up to much. Borchardt undoubtedly treated the thing the wrong way and Lupus has mucked up matters by undue zeal and unnecessary foot-slogging. The thing might have other disagreeable, if not serious, consequences later on. He was in Buxton and then in Devonshire where he again had to endure the horror of bad hotels, got nothing to drink and was colossally fleeced.

I hope your wife, too, is now better. The tailor will be able to have half the amount in October.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

181

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 13 August 1858

Dear Engels,

I am delighted to hear that my fears about your health were unfounded.

Of the two letters I meant to send you, one was from Weydemeyer (Milwaukee, Wisconsin) and the other from one A. Komp (New York), both of which arrived under the same cover. I had put them down on the table (my writing-table) to enclose them in my letter to you, forgot, and then couldn't find them. They are probably tucked away in one of the many

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Ferdinand Lassalle's - b Jenny and Laura Marx



I know nothing about the Cyclopaedia save that I've seen an advertisement for the second volume in the Tribune.3 So it's still coming out and, if you have the leisure, you might occasionally do something for C.—subject, however, to two reservations: 1. I cannot go to the Museumb just now; 2. it would be of more immediate advantage to me to increase my balance at the Tribune. This has already decreased slightly since my wife went away and I cannot in any case write twice for them myself, as it's impossible for me to deal with subjects such as India, Montenegro, China, Bonaparte's military railway system and his installations at Cherbourg.328 Hence, as soon as time permits (and, OF COURSE, without physical HARM to yourself), I would greatly prefer it if, in the immediate future, you were to write more often for the Tribune, ON ANY SUBJECT WHATEVER.

The sea is doing my wife a lot of good; at the beginning of this week she sent for all the children and Lenchen.c So FAR so GOOD; the only snag is that, UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES, I shall hardly be able to let her stay there beyond next week. Mentally she is very much refreshed, but physically (save that her nerves are stronger) she is not yet all that she might be. In Ramsgate she has made the acquaintance of refined and, horribile dictu,d clever Englishwomen. After years during which she has enjoyed only inferior company, if any at all, intercourse with people of her own kind seems to agree with her.

Have you read the review in The Times of Gladstone's book on Homer?6 There is much that is amusing in it (the review). A work such as this is, by the by, typical of your Englishman's incompetence in matters of 'philology'.

I presume that TRADE IN MANCHESTER is again LOOKING UP? Indeed, over the past few weeks the world has grown damned optimistic again.

Mr Pyat, still oppressed by the fact that his name was not given due prominence during the recent political prosecutions, has published a fresh 'lettre'' about his 'lettre' to the Parliament, containing a vindication of 'regicide'.329 In order to compel the government to prosecute, he has flouted police regulations by

[^1]: a New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5319, 8 May 1858 - b the British Museum Library - c Helene Demuth - d horrible to mention - e W. E. Gladstone, Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age (the review appeared in The Times, Nos. 23070 and 23071, 12 and 13 August 1858 under the tide'Mr. Gladstone's Homeric Studies'). - f F. Pyat, Lettre au jury. Défense de la lettre au Parlement et à la Presse.



