---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "183. Marx to Engels. 21 September "
Page_Range: "376-378"
---

# 183. Marx to Engels. 21 September 

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

183

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 September 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

DEAR Frederick,

You must exercise your customary forbearance and excuse my long silence. The indisposition from which I was suffering even before leaving Manchester again became chronic—persisting throughout the entire summer—so that any kind of writing costs me a tremendous effort. For the same reason my manuscriptb is only now about to go off (IN 2 WEEKS), but there will be 2 instalments AT ONCE. Even though I had nothing to do but correct the style of what had already been written, I might sometimes sit for hours before getting this or that phrase right. For ABOUT 8 DAYS, by the by, I have been much better and on the whole I find the cooler time of year more beneficial. Moreover, there is every prospect that, with my mother's help, I shall be able to put my domestic affairs entirely in order and also start to take HORSE EXERCISE again. The latter will be my prime concern, as soon as the BUSINESS has been attended to.

Meanwhile I have been writing very regularly for the Tribune, as 1 have no desire to make these chaps a gift of any money.

Find out from Lupus or (direcdy or indirecdy) from Borchardt whether they know a Mrs von Paula (might sign herself Paulaw) who once lived in Breslau.13 If so, I have something curious to tell you.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'To the Editor of the Neue Zeit'. - b A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - c Wroclaw





**[p. 342]**

O u r friend Jones HAS DECIDEDLY SOLD HIMSELF (BUT AT THE LOWEST POSSIBLE PRICE) TO THE BRIGHT COTERIE. T h e idiot has ruined himself politically without rescuing himself commercially. I'll cut out the articles relating to him in Reynolds's and send them to you. But how litde his apostasy—the laddie is preaching UNION OF THE MIDDLE AND WORKING CLASSES—has availed him (he has sold The People's Paper to the Morning Star fellows, has retained a mere couple of columns in the sheet for himself a n d is, moreover, already at loggerheads with his new allies over the financial terms) will be evident to you from the fact that the day before yesterday he went to Freiligrath and handed him a letter in German in which h e asked for £ 4 , failing which he would be 'locked up'. Freiligrath told him to address himself 'TO OUR FRIEND GILPIN'. T h a t Gilpin is MANAGING DIRECTOR of the SWITZERLAND BANK and of the paper with which Jones has incorporated himself. If you possibly have time, write ANYTHING for Friday. I wrote about the Chinese Treaty yesterday.332

Your K. M.

[^1]: Lina g is now STAYING with us, having lost h e r position again. Salut. Regards to Lupus.

[^2]: a 'The Russian Agent in Circassia', The Free Press, No. 20,25 August 1858. - b See this volume, p. 109. - c K. Marx, 'Another Strange Chapter of Modern History'. - d Report from the Select Committee on Bank Acts - e 'To the Editor of N. Y. Tribune', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5420, 4 September 1858. - l The editors' reply was published in the same issue as the Banker's letter. - K Caroline Schöler



