---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "184. Engels to Marx. 7 October "
Page_Range: "378-380"
---

# 184. Engels to Marx. 7 October 

Come what may, you must arrange to spend a few days here over Christmas or the New Year.

According to the latest report in The Economist, French trade has got worse rather than better over recent months.3 {Give the enclosed to Lupus.)

First published abridged in Der Briefivech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

184

ENGELS TO MARX1

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 October 1858

Dear Moor,

No doubt you will be writing about the Canning despatch tomorrow333; THE THING IS OUT OF MY LATITUDE ALTOGETHER. I have not read the newspapers at all regularly of late and have had a great deal to do, since Ermen has been over there for the past fortnight and I am having to cope with the whole shop on my own. Business here is tremendously good; for the past 6 weeks the spinners have been making Id à l'Ad more per pound on coarse and medium counts than for the past 3 years and—quite unprecedented this—the local market in yarn rose Id before the Liverpool chaps were able to get another 'Ad for cotton. During the past 10-12 days the rise has slowed down somewhat, but all the spinners are booked up well ahead and demand is still quite strong enough to sustain prices. If it goes on like this much longer there'll be MOVEMENTS for increased wages. In France, too, the cotton spinners have for sometime been earning more than in recent years (this is positive; I have it from a cotton agent who was over there himself); how things look in other branches of commerce there I can't say exactly, but the state of the Bourse suggests a considerable improvement. All this looks damned rosy and the

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a 'Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation for the Seven Months Ended July 31, 1858', The Economist, No. 783 (supplement), 28 August 1858.





**[p. 344]**

The Jones business is most distasteful. He held a meeting here and the speech he made was entirely in the spirit of the new alliance.334 After that affair one might almost believe that the English proletarian movement in its old traditional Chartist form must perish utterly before it can evolve in a new and viable form. And yet it is not possible to foresee what the new form will look like. It seems to me, by the way, that there is in fact a connection between Jones' NEW MOVE, seen in conjunction with previous more or less successful attempts at such an alliance, and the fact that the English proletariat is actually becoming more and more bourgeois, so that the ultimate aim of this most bourgeois of all nations would appear to be the possession, alongside the bourgeoisie, of a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat. In the case of a nation which exploits the entire world this is, of course, justified to some extent. Only a couple of thoroughly bad years might help here, but after the discoveries of gold these are no longer so easy to engineer. For the rest it is a complete mystery to me how the massive overproduction which caused the crisis has been absorbed; never before has such heavy flooding drained away so rapidly.

Reynolds will become a prominent personage thanks to Jones' manoeuvre; he is the only 'educated' man (vulgo 'scholar') who still poses as the representative of the proletariat—au fond3 he is as bourgeois as Monsieur Jones has now become, though in a different way. For him this is a GODSEND. Be sure to send me the cuttings from his paperb you promised me.

There is still something wrong with Lupus' leg; he still can't walk fast without suffering for it, though he is walking passably well again.

[^1]: a in the main - b Reynolds's Newspaper



