---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "186. Engels to Marx. 21 October "
Page_Range: "383-385"
---

# 186. Engels to Marx. 21 October 



**[p. 186]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 21 October 1858

Dear Moor,

For the past fortnight I've been VERY MUCH PUT OUT OF THE WAY by sundry slings and arrows—a rumpus at my LODGINGS necessitating a move and all that entails and, for good measure, a mass of other tiresome happenings. I haven't even found new LODGINGS yet and am hardly likely to be out of the TROUBLE before the end of next week.

Much obliged for the stuff relating to Jones, Mazzini and Pyat, likewise the 'enthusiastic general'.11 The latter seems to have surrendered entirely to the vulgar German-American day-dream; habeat sibi,b let him go hang. Quoadc Jones, I should say that Reynolds's is a bit short on FACTS and presupposes some degree of familiarity with preceding events. This turn things have finally taken is hardly surprising in view of the contemptible way Monsieur Jones has already long been behaving. But simply to throw oneself away like that! Duncombe did at least get his debts paid and a good position into the bargain.

Pyat and Mazzini, even by comparison with formerly, are distinguishing themselves by a surprising poverty of intelligence.

Prospects for Mr Rudolf Schramm seem exceedingly poor. Now as always, the corporald is confiscating newspapers and, if the telegraphic despatches are to be believed, did not even swear an oath on the Constitution yesterday. At any rate, the joyous day-dream which the Prussian bourgeois have deluded each other into believing will very soon evaporate, but I agree with you when you say that this won't be the end of the affair.336 However, I'm not yet clear as to what course it will take. I should say that the bourgeoisie has not yet got over 1848 and 1849 to such an extent as to summon up sufficient courage simultaneously to confront on the one hand the aristocracy and bureaucracy, and, on the other, proletarian unrest. However, it's possible that, so long as nothing is going on in France, the proletarian movement will for a time seem too slight a threat to be very intimidating; but in that case its

[^1]: a August Willich - b for all I care - c As for - d William, Prince of Prussia





**[p. 349]**

The Russian affair is turning out very well.335 There is unrest in the South now, too. Apropos. Could you obtain for me from Tchorzewsky, or whoever Herzen's agent is now, a few of his more recent publications? After all, these ought to contain something, e.g. his ro Roca U3b Pocciu (Voices from Russia) and the KOROKOJH (Bell). Some material might be found in them, though hardly very much—but certainly now and again in the correspondents' reports, etc., etc.

My sources for the Central Asiatic stuff were Brockhaus' new volume Unsere Zeit* (partly copied from the Preußisches Wochen- blatt) and Petermann's geographical Mittheilungen.h The material is all derived from Russian state papers. If you like I could write an article about the Russian treaty with China339 (what a slap in the face for England and France!) for Tuesday, or thereabouts,' i.e. if not prevented by my exodus. Let me know, and also send your further comments on the connection you suspect exists between the Elgin treaty and Pam. Or perhaps you have already dealt with this yourself?

India is now quite outside my LATITUDE. From the military point of view nothing at all remains to be said. So desultory has everything become that it's not even possible to do a survey of one month's events. Altogether, I'm in a quandary about subjects for articles to send you.

What's the position about the manuscript for Dunckere? Nows YOUR TIME. Come what may, there'll be a new ministry which will probably be rather more hesitant about making its début with the confiscation of a scientific work. I hope it has gone off. But let me know for sure, so that I can reassure Lupus too. Last Sunday he arrived at my place very much the worse for drink, but was safely escorted home. Since then his leg has been rather worse again; no doubt it took a knock.

[^1]: a Unsere Zeit. Jahrbuch zum Conversations-Lexikon, Bd. 2. - b Mitteilungen aus Justus Perthes' Geographischer Anstalt - ' F. Engels, 'Russia's Successes in the Far East'. - d See this volume, p. 347. - e K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.

[^2]: 13-194



