---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "187. Marx to Engels. 22 October "
Page_Range: "385-390"
---

# 187. Marx to Engels. 22 October 



**[p. 350]**

For the past four weeks, trade here has been going through a sticky period during which the spinners have had their profits cut by '/ad per lb as a result of a fall in yarn and a rise in cotton. However, they are still doing good business and, if cotton again comes down a bit, as is quite possible, it will take only a minimal increase in demand to restore the situation. Moreover, there are signs here and there of moves by the workers to obtain higher wages and, if business continues good, these will gather force.

How are things going with your mater? Best regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

187

MARX TO ENGELS

Dear Engels,

I haven't a moment to lose today, for it's already 2 o'clock and I've still not begun the article.341 I am just writing you these few lines to inform you that you must send something next week. Two articles a week means my spending an enormous amount of time hunting for material. Write about China. Another subject might be the ludicrous RIFLED CANNONS article in today's Times!"

Yesterday, after ages of silence, a letter arrived from Pieper— from the hospital in Dalston (London).

My mother has written me a fatuous letter. She has postponed our discussion until such time as / 'shall' visit her. Obviously there has been interference by a third party.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: [London,] Friday [22 October 1858]34,)

[^3]: 'The theory of war ', The Times, No. 23131, 22 October 1858.





**[p. 351]**

The manuscript11 has not gone off yet and, Lupus or no Lupus, it will be weeks before I am able to send it.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

188

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 November 1858

DEAR Frederick,

Enclosed you will find works by the great Blind, who now functions as a 'united' friend of the people. The £100 has also been remitted to him by Kinkel. Keep the stuff. You will observe that Pyat and Mazzini still stand head and shoulders above these German democrats in the matter of style, etc. Blind has also set his hand over here to the trade he learnt on the Mannheimer Abendzeitung. He gets a couple of acquaintances in Hamburg to send to English papers letters (composed by himself) in which mention is made of the stir created by his anonymous pam- phlets." His friends then write more letters, this time to the German press, saying what a fuss has been made by the English papers, etc. That, you see, is what it is to be a man of action.

Paid a visit to 'unhappy' Pieper in hospital. Has a syphilitic boil on his forehead. Otherwise the same old Pieper. Probably won't be cured before the end of December, when he proposes to take a trip to Hanover.

[^1]: 'Montalembert'h WILL DO. Yesterday I wrote about Quasimodo's goings-on with the Portuguese.342

[^2]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - b F. Engels, 'The Prosecution of Montalembert'.

[^3]: 13*



Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

189

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 November 1858

DEAR Frederick,

For the past 10 days I have had the most appalling toothache and ulcers all over my mouth, i.e. inflammation of the gums, etc. HENCE IN VERY BAD HUMOUR, these having come on top of all my other troubles.

Your articlea went off yesterday as of Friday, since I had sent nothing on that day. I myself wrote about the new Prussian ministry. Have now sent about six articles on Prussia dated Berlin to the Tribune^ So I don't imagine that you will be able to have ANY NEW MATTER concerning Prussia for next Tuesday. One subject that might be worth writing about, though in this case I fear our COMMON MATERIAL GOES NOT VERY FAR, would be the growth of industry in Prussia over the last 10 years. But WHENCE obtain the 'material'? As regards Japan I imagine the Yankees know more about it than we do, though in fact their knowledge is always exceedingly superfi- cial. Those engaged in high politics (e.g. Mr Pulszky in the Tribune) are blathering away about a possible war in Italy between Austria on the one hand and Bonaparte and Piedmont on the other. I regard all that as nonsense. Might it not, on the whole, be a good idea to say something sensible for once about Bonaparte's

[^1]: 11 F. Engels, 'The Prosecution of Montalembert'. - b K. Marx, 'The King of Prussia's Insanity' (2 articles), 'The Prussian Regency', 'Affairs in Prussia' (2 articles), 'The New Ministry' (2 articles).





**[p. 353]**

ELSE.

I had forgotten to enclose Blind's 'pamphlets'.343 Unfortunately I can't lay my hands on the most idiotic one, Aufruf an Schleswig- Holstein—yes, here it is at last. In addition I am sending you a speech by that clown Edgar Bauer from the London Neue Zeit? Keep the things.

Next week I have to pay more than one pound interest at the pawnshop. As it's impossible for me to draw on the Tribune just now, I'd be grateful if you would send me the pound.

Mind you write and tell me your opinion of Mr E. Bauer's 'Philosophy of History'.

Salut. Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

ig 13 Published in English for the first time

190

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

London, 12 November 1858 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

because you gave no address.

Well, d'abord: beatus illec who is not seen through Köster's eyes but who sees with the eyes of Köster. I and Freiligrath had explained at length to Köster himself that throughout the summer

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: Post tot pericula!h My answer to your last letterc was held up by an infamous toothache. I didn't answer your letter from Frankfurtd

[^3]: a E. Bauer, 'Vorträge über die Geschichte der Politik', Die Neue Zeit, No. 20, 6 November 1858. - b After so many dangers! - c of 22 October 1858 - d This letter is not extant. - e first: Blessed is he (Horace, Epodes, II, 1).



As regards the delay in sending off the manuscript,b I was first prevented from doing so by illness, and subsequently had to catch up on the other 'bread and butter' work. But the real reason is this: the material was to hand and all that I was concerned with was the form. But to me the style of everything I wrote seemed tainted with liver trouble. And I have a twofold motive for not allowing this work to be spoiled on medical grounds:

1. It is the product of 15 years of research, i.e. the best years of my life.

2. In it an important view of social relations is scientifically expounded for the first time. Hence I owe it to the Party that the thing shouldn't be disfigured by the kind of heavy, wooden style proper to a disordered liver.

My aim is not to produce an elegant exposé, but only to write as I usually do, which, during these months of sickness, was impossible—at least on this subject, although over the same period I was compelled to write, and hence did write, the equivalent of at least 2 printed volumes of English leading articles de omnibus rebus et quibusdam aliis.c

I believe that even if someone less intelligent than you were to acquaint Mr Duncker with this state of affairs, he could not but sanction a mode of conduct which, so far as he as a publisher was concerned, merely signified the endeavour to give him the best value for his money.

I shall have finished about 4 weeks from now, having only just begun the actual writing.

There is a further circumstance which, however, you should not put to him until the arrival of the manuscript. The first section, 'Capital in General', is likely to run to 2 instalment's since I have discovered while elaborating it that here, at the very juncture where the most abstract aspect of political economy is to be discussed, undue brevity would render the thing indigestible to the public. But on the other hand this second instalment must come

[^1]: a refugees' - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - ' about everything under the sun and more



