---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "190. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 12 November "
Page_Range: "390-392"
---

# 190. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 12 November 



**[p. 355]**

Apropos. In your letter from Frankfurt you said nothing about your economic work.278 As far as our rivalry is concerned, I don't believe that the German public suffers from an embarras de richesses

in this field. IN FACT economics as a science in the German sense of the word has yet to be tackled and to that end not just the two of us but a dozen will be needed. I hope, at any rate, that my work will result in drawing a number of better brains into the same field of research.

I should be infinitely obliged to you if you could write to me from time to time about conditions in Prussia and send me the relevant newspaper clippings.

My wife sends her regards and says she is afraid Köster is as mistaken about 'her beauty' as he is about her husband's health.

Freiligrath likewise sends his regards. He is completely im- mersed in his profession of banker. Hence you should not hold his silence against him.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

191

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 24 November 1858

DEAR Frederick,

Yesterday I wrote about Prussia.11 So for Friday you have all the rest of the world at your disposal.

Have received the £1. The 'particular' pickle in which I find myself at the moment arises from the fact that I was compelled to pay out all AT ONCE more than £8 to the newspaper man, who had

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stuttgart- Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a 'Affairs in Prussia'

[^4]: 13*'





**[p. 356]**

Blind was here the day before yesterday with wife.b It was over a year since I had seen this FAMILY. From them I learnt sundry pieces of gossip.

1. Mrs Kinkel threw herself out of the window a week ago last Monday and has since been buried. Gottfried,0 with a sublimity all his own, attended the post-mortem and delivered an 'oration' at the graveside. Freiligrath is so moved that he'll shun me, as a 'frivolous' man, for a fortnight at least.

2. Fröbel is over here. Has married a rich wife. Is returning to America. According to him Russia and America must share the world between them, a point of view that makes him feel very superior. He enthuses over American 'luxury' and GENTLEMAN- LIKENESS, despises the Germans and gives practical proof of this by engaging in the German slave trade to Central America. It's really too comical that, because deeply impressed by bourgeois society in its American reality, this son of Rudolstadt should believe himself more 'advanced' than the REST OF EUROPE-. Once they HAVE FOUND THEIR BREAD AND CHEESE, all these scoundrels require is some blasé pretext to bid farewell to the struggle.

3. Asinine Ruge, in a piece for Prutz, has proved that 'Shakespeare was not a dramatic poet' because he 'had no philosophical system', whereas Schiller, being a Kantian, is a TRULY 'dramatic poet'.d Prutz then wrote a 'vindication of Shakespeare'." In addition, Ruge described Moleschott in the American papers as 'a silly ass', whereupon Heinzen sacked him from the Pionier.

However, the old bounder is now finding a place for his inanities in Börnstein's Anzeiger des Westens.

4. The foolish Ewerbeck returned to Paris two years ago, corresponds regularly with Blind. Had let himself be inveigled by Ribbentrop into marrying Ribbentrop's maid, only to discover that the former was tumbling the latter, after which came divorce, lawsuit, etc. He was assistant in a Paris library, and was sacked by the priests. Writes to say he only has 1,200 frs left, threatens to come to England having read in the Univers, etc., that 'socialism and atheism' are flourishing in the latter country.

[^1]: '•' Emilie Marx - b Friederike Blind - c Gottfried Kinkel - d A. Ruge, 'Idealismus und Realismus im Reich des Ideals', Deutsches Museum, Nos. 14, 15, 19, 1 and 8 April, 6 May 1858. - e R. E. Prutz, 'Literaturgeschichte', Deutsches Museum, No. 24, 10 June

[^2]: 1858.



