---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "191. Marx to Engels. 24 November "
Page_Range: "392-394"
---

# 191. Marx to Engels. 24 November 



**[p. 357]**

6. Loutish Landolphe has reappeared in England as a beggar and through Blind's intervention, has been engaged by Dr Bronner at a German school in Bradford.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original 5«/ zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. U m e

XXII, Moscow, 1929

192

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 November 1858

[^1]: DEAR Frederick,

[^2]: ARTICLE received.3 VERY GOOD. Quoadh Bonaparte, I have lately dealt with two separate points—the SHAM PROVOCATION of England in the Portuguese affair342 and how the fellow is GENERALLY avenging Waterloo 2 7 only in so far as he can do so by SHAM DEMONSTRATIONS within the 'limits of the English alliance' and hence, IN FACT, with the permission of the English government, although he is, in reality, England's underling. Secondly, his edict re the CORN- GRANARIES,0 by which this 'socialist' proposes to remedy the ruinously LOW PRICES OF CORN—dangerously low, in view of the grumbles of the PEASANTRY—by creating an artificial demand at the BAKERS expense. 0

[^3]: GENERALLY, A VERY DANGEROUS EXPERIMENT THIS, TO RAISE THE PRICE OF CORN THROUGH GOVERNMENT UKASES. Increasing the cost of bread will do more harm to his popularity in the towns than it can do good in the country.

[^4]: a F. Engels, 'Europe in 1858'. - b As regards - c Napoleon Ill's decree on grain reserves of 16 November 1858, Le Moniteur universel, No. 322, 18 November 1858. - d K. Marx, 'Project for the Regulation of the Price of Bread in France'.





**[p. 358]**

As regards the reform movement in England, all I have discussed latterly is Bright's meeting in Birmingham, b the gist of the article being THAT HIS PROGRAMME IS A REDUCTION OF THE PEOPLES CHARTER TO THE MIDDLE CLASS STANDARD.344 Earlier on, ABOUT 8-12 WEEKS ago (I think Parliament was actually still sitting), a piece to the effect that WHIGGISM MUST DISSOLVE AND COALESCE WITH TORYISM INTO THE PARTY OF THE ARISTOCRACY.0 T h a t is all.

My wife is copying the manuscript d and it's hardly likely to go off before the end of this month. T h e reasons for the delay: long intervals of physical indisposition which, with the cold weather, has now come to an end. T o o much domestic and financial TROUBLE. Finally, the first section is now longer because the two initial chapters, of which the first, The Commodity, did not appear at all in the rough draft while the second, Money, or Simple Circulation, was only sketched in the briefest outline, have been written at greater length than I originally planned.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Mr Edgar Bauer is now the real, and Mr Lout and Weitlingian Scherzer the nominal, editor of the London Neue Zeit. Mr Edgar, of course, has a great deal to say on the subject of Mr Edgar and his lectures to the working men, e for he himself writes about everything concerning Mr Edgar. This CLOWN deems it necessary to take a revolutionary TURN. He presided at the Robert Blum ceremony. In an essay in the last issue the CLOWN makes the discovery that 'imperialism' has now been introduced into Prussia

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Political Parties in England.—The Situation in Europe', 'The Question of the Abolition of Serfdom in Russia'. - b A reference to J. Bright's speech at a meeting of Birmingham constituents on 27 October 1858 (the meeting was reported in The Times, No. 23136, 28 October 1858). - c Marx expressed this idea in his article 'Political Parties in England.—The Situation in Europe'. - d K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - e E. Bauer, 'Vorträge über die Geschichte der Politik', Die Neue Zeit, No. 20, 6 November 1858.



