---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "193. Marx to Engels. 11 December "
Page_Range: "396-398"
---

# 193. Marx to Engels. 11 December 



**[p. 194]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 16 December 1858

Dear Engels,

MY BEST THANKS. How welcome the money was you will see from the enclosed letter, which arrived at the same time. It is my belief that Schapper and I and 100 others know better what it is to 'fight' in London than do the 'scattered remnants' beside the old harridan's3 grave. The Heckscher story calls for further investiga- tion. Nice of Freiligrath to give the signal for a Kinkel REVIVAL in Germany. For Lupus' amusement I enclose some of my Berlin GOSSIP articlesh which I have cut out of the Tribune; also your article on Montalembert, which Dana included under 'Paris', so that in that particular issue of the Tribune we represent the whole of Europe AT ONCE.C

Salut.

Your

K. M.

News will soon reach Lupus that the manuscriptd has gone off, but I'll be blowed if anyone else in similar circumstances and with as rotten a liver could have got it done as soon.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the frrst Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a Johanna Kinkel - b See this volume, p. 352. - c A reference to Engels' article 'The Prosecution of Montalembert' and Marx's 'The New Ministry'. - d K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.





**[p. 195]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 December [1858]

DEAR Frederick,

£ 2 received with THANKS.

I knew about Blind's confection (just the kind of thing, as he told me himself, that Hecker used to do), although I wasn't, of course, aware of some of the nicer details. D'abord," this Telegraph Morning Express is edited by several English Seilers, and all its telegraphic despatches, or at any rate the better part of them, are reprinted from London morning papers. I can vouch for the FACT that Blind smuggled a bogus TELEGR. DESPATCH1 (dated Brussels) into The Morning Advertiser. This was, OF COURSE, instantly appropriated by the Telegraph Morning Express. Secondly, Dr Bronner is not merely an but the agent of Blind, [he] having 'no other' to send. I also believe it was he himself who 'decreed' that [the missive] be sent to Lupus, since Bronner never does anything [without] official sanction. In today's Daily Telegraph also, you will find in the letter from Berlin: *'Similar petitions have been presented to the (Holstein) Diet by the German merchants resident at Bradford and Liverpool.'* T h e industry of these little Baden fleas hatched in the democratic midden is touching. Even the Ancients indulged in sundry edifying reflections on the subject of flea jumps.

[^1]: I've had a satisfying experience with the Tribune. For months that rotten sheet had published as LEADERS all my articles on China (a complete history of Anglo-Chinese trade, b etc.) and had even been complimented on them. But when the official text of the Anglo-Chinese treaty332 was finally released, I wrote an article in which I said inter alia that the Chinese 'would now legalise the import of opium, likewise put an IMPORT DUTY on opium and, LASTLY, might even permit the cultivation of opium actually in China', and thus the SECOND OPIUM WAR' would SOONER OR LATER deal a DEADLY BLOW to the English OPIUM TRADE, and notably to the INDIAN EXCHEQUER^ WELL! Mr Dana printed this article as being from an OCCASIONAL CORRESPONDENT- in London, and himself wrote a bombastic LEADER

[^2]: a First - b K. Marx. 'History of the Opium Trade' (two articles). - c K. Marx, 'The British and Chinese Treaty'.



