---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "194. Marx to Engels. 16 December "
Page_Range: "398-399"
---

# 194. Marx to Engels. 16 December 



**[p. 363]**

Apropos. My brother-in-law,0 a tall and tedious if worthy Dutchman, is coming u p to Manchester on business. And notably to ascertain the solvency of certain individuals. Send me your private address, as he wishes to contact you. But avoid any allusion to my PRIVATE AFFAIRS.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Little by little philistine Freiligrath is coughing u p sundry things about Gottfried.d 1. that Gottfried is sending Gerstenberg to see various MERCHANTS in the City, suggesting they subscribe to the Hermann. After all, says he, the poor man has got to 'live' and make u p for the 'loss' incurred through the death of his wife. 2. He tells me that Gottfried, immediately after the Mockel woman's death, approached him and asked whether (and how big) a deal might be done with Cotta over her literary estate. 'After all', says Gottfried, 'I enjoy the favour of the public' It could be that Blind himself is again hoodwinking The Morning Advertiser and getting friend Schütz to send bogus telegraphic despatches from Brussels.

Cluss has married someone he met at Dr Wiss's in Baltimore. Apropos, on the strength of Blind's recommendation, Bronner has found Landolphe the grec" a schoolmaster's post in Bradford.

[^1]: Mr Liehknecht has introduced Edgar Bauer into the Workers' Society.50 I WATCH HIM.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a 'Our London correspondent suggests', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5455, 15 October 1858 - b 'the day before yesterday' is deleted. - c Johann Carl Juta - d Kinkel - c swindler

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



