---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "195. Marx to Engels. 17 December "
Page_Range: "399-401"
---

# 195. Marx to Engels. 17 December 



**[p. 196]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 December 1858

Dear Engels,

Yesterday I wrote about Buchanan's MESSAGE349—REVIEWED the English PAPERS' criticism thereof.3 I should be very glad if you could let me have an article by Friday on, say, Campbell's latest campaign, or ANYTHING ELSE. Since the manuscript b must go off to Duncker before the end of this year there is, quite literally, no time to lose.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: 197

[^2]: MARX T O ENGELS

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: London, 28 December 1858

[^5]: A Happy New Year! Ditto to Lupus.

[^6]: HOW WITH SERVIA? 3 5° Salut.

[^7]: K. Marx

[^8]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^9]: a J. Buchanan, 'The President's Message to the XXXVth Congress', The Times, No. 23181, 20 December 1858. The paper reviewed the 'Message' in the same issue, in a leader beginning with the words, 'There is nothing in the Message of President Buchanan'. - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.





**[p. 198]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 30 December 1858

DEAR Frederick,

Of COLONEL Hodges it has been observed—and this puts the seal on Pam's participation in the Serbian affair—that he was a sort of Palmerstonian Bangya.

I shall for a time again be writing articles on economics for the Tribune and also on Prussia,3 so all the rest of the world is at your disposal. In addition, yesterday I wrote about Ireland and the CONSPIRACIES there and the government's Donc E.b Whenever I deal with a theme other than the two mentioned above I shall always advise you.

Will you be so good as to send me Lupus' private address.

Salut, and for the 2nd time, this time seasonably, a Happy New Year.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the manu- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Script Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Published in English for the first Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 t i m e

[^2]: a This probably refers to Marx's articles 'Project for the Regulation of the Price of Bread in France' and 'Affairs in Prussia' (three instalments). - b 'The Excitement in Ireland'



