---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "197. Marx to Engels. 28 December "
Page_Range: "401-402"
---

# 197. Marx to Engels. 28 December 



**[p. 366]**

1859

199

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 January 1859a

Dear Engels,

Will you be so good as to send me Lupus' address. If you have done with Serbia,350 there is fresh material READY to hand in the (proposed) changes in the Landwehr in Prussia, on which I shall have to report.3 Today's Times contains a detailed account dated Vienna of the latest brouhaha in Serbia.b

While Mr Edgar Bauer is editorc under THE AUSPICES of Scherzer and is even adopting 'class contradictions' and giving them a Berlin twist, Mr Gottfried Kinkel, who can't afford to let slip the opportunity presented by the Kinkel REVIVAL, is bringing out a weekly in London, to wit, the Hermann (not the Cheruscan, I presume, but Goethe's SIMPLETON).352 Freiligrath, or so it seems from a brief note he sent me, is already REPENTANT of the BLUNDER d he committed. If you write, tell him (but most politely, OF COURSE, for he complains about the crude, brash tone of your letters) that in Manchester there is much talk among the Germans about his alliance with Kinkel; you might also slip in Heckscher's anecdote, quoting your source. At this particular time it is of moment to us that Freiligrath should break with these swine for good.

Apropos, Willich is now editing the gymnasts' paper in Cincinnati/ Was 'selected' as editor there. He accepted the appointment (doubtless obtained for him by Cluss so as to rid himself of the man) in a superb circular letter in which he says

[^1]: a 1858 in the original - b 'The Revolution in Servia', The Times, No. 23196, 6 January 1859. - c of Die Neue Zeit - d See this volume, pp. 359-60. - e Die Timi-Zritung



