---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "199. Marx to Engels. 6 January "
Page_Range: "403-404"
---

# 199. Marx to Engels. 6 January 

The manuscript amounts to ABOUT 12 sheets of print (3 instalments) and—don't be bowled over by this—although entided Capital in General, these instalments contain nothing as yet on the subject of capital, but only the two chapters: L The Commodity, 2. Money or Simple Circulation. As you can see, the part that was worked out in detail (in May, when I was staying with you318) is not to appear at all yet.355 This is good on two counts. If the thing is a success, the third chapter on capital can follow very soon. Secondly, since the matter in the published part will, by its very nature, prevent the curs from confining their criticism solely to tendentious vituperation, and since the whole thing has an EXCEEDINGLY serious and scientific air, the canaille will later on be compelled to take my views on capital RATHER SERIOUSLY. Besides, I believe that, all practical considerations apart, the chapter on money will be of interest to experts.

I have had to alter your article on Bonaparte-Italyb somewhat, having myself written about the same subject on Tuesday.0 Among the AGENCIES which are egging Bonaparte on you forget Russia. Pam did not visit Paris for nothing, nor were the Russian MOVES IN ITALY without significance, nor yet Russia's coquetry with Bonaparte since the Peace of Paris.356 If Russia does no more than compel the Austrians, through Bonaparte, to sack their minister Buol and replace him with a Pan-Slav Russian agent, she will have achieved a great deal.

In the American press Ruge is emerging as the fanatical champion of the Prince of Prussia. Schrammd has been given permission to return to Prussia (the warrant against him having been withdrawn) and to appear before a new jury without undergoing preventive deten- tion.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: As Berlin correspondent I have promised an article on the Prussian army which you might do ONE OF THESE DAYS.351

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'The Money Panic in Europe'. - c K. Marx, 'The War Prospect in Europe'. - d Rudolf Schramm

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



