---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "201. Marx to Engels. Between 13 and 15 January "
Page_Range: "404-406"
---

# 201. Marx to Engels. Between 13 and 15 January 



**[p. 202]**

MARX TO ENGELS82

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 January [1859]

Dear Engels,

The ill-fated manuscript3 is ready but can't be sent off as I haven't a FARTHING for postage or insurance. This last is essential since I have no copy of it. Hence I must ask you to let me have a little money by Monday (POST OFFICE IN TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD CORNER). If you could send £2 it would be most welcome as I have put off paying various small tradesmen until Monday, after which any further postponements will be absolutely out of the question. As you can imagine, it is far from pleasant for me to burden you again just now when you have paid, or have got to pay, Freiligrath's bill. BUT IRON NECESSITY. Next week—as I am giving myself a week's holiday quoadb the next part of the manuscript—I shall see if I can't manage to pull off some financial coup or other. I don't suppose anyone has ever written about 'money' when so short of the stuff. Most autores on this SUBJECT have been on terms of the utmost amity with THE SUBJECT OF THEIR RESEARCHES.

Should the thing prove a success in Berlin, there's a chance that I might get out of all this mess. It's HIGH TIME I did.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

If the thing proves a success in Berlin, it might be possible to strike a bargain with a London publisher in respect of an English translation, and there's no comparison between what one is paid over here and in Berlin. Besides, such an EVENT would dreadfully annoy our worthy enemies. The canaille believed that we were both of us done for—the more so just now when Mr Clown 'Edgar Bauer' has 'supplanted' us 'in the eyes of working-men', as Gottfried Kinkel is telling all and sundry in the City. With every word they publish, the canaille are making out their own death warrants and well may they wonder what SORT OF LIFE' we have preserved.

[^1]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - b as regards



RESERVES TO HIMSELF THE RIGHT OF TRANSLATION-. ( A s y OU k n O W , t h e r e ' s a copyright agreement between Prussia and England.) My aversion to all humbug and semblance of vanity or pretentiousness says 'No'. On the other hand my own interests say 'Yes'. The more so since some scrawl about monetary matters is published almost weekly in England. WHAT DO YOU THINK, SIR? This point requires an immediate answer since I myself must decide by Monday.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

203

ENGELS TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH357

IN LONDON

[Draft]

Manchester, 25 January 1859

Dear Freiligrath,

The bloody boy who was to have got the POST OFFICE ORDER yesterday idled away the time instead, which is why the 22/- will only arrive today. Many thanks for your trouble and for the outlay.

As to the Neueste Rheinische Zeitung,™ due provision has been made, never fear. We have in the meanwhile learnt a great deal and forgotten nothing,359 and that's more than the others can say. Of this you could find no better illustration than the Hermann (clearly a misprint for Gottfried, otherwise the title's meaningless21), which you recently described as the Rheinische Zeitungs John the Baptist. It's a long time since I've read rubbish as insipid, namby-pamby, tail-wagging, lavish of compliments, conciliatory, propitiatory and atrociously written as is found in this, the latest product of the pseudo-noble sometime Maikäfer360 which, to judge by its style and content, is aimed solely at and tailored to the tastes of the Cambeiwell philistines and the German ditto in the City. The man has even forgotten what little he managed to pick up in 1848 and has become a real bourgeois windbag. Now, since it was you who brought up the topic of this cheery customer,

[^1]: a An allusion to Gottfried Kinkel's weekly Hermann.



