---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "206. Marx to Engels. 28 January "
Page_Range: "410-411"
---

# 206. Marx to Engels. 28 January 

I have broken witfi Ernest Jones.245 Despite my repeated warnings, and although I had predicted exactly what would happen—namely that he would ruin himself and disorganise the Chartist Party—he took the course of trying to come to terms with the BOURGEOIS RADICALS. HE IS NOW A RUINED MAN, but the harm he has done to the English proletariat is incalculable. The fault will, of course, be rectified, but a most favourable moment for action has been missed. Imagine an army whose general goes over to the enemy camp on the eve of battle.

You'll have heard that Mr Kinkel has become a famous man again because Mrs Kinkel fell out of a window and broke her neck. The 'cheery' customer—never has he felt so jolly as since the death of the old Mockel woman—promptly decided to tout round his 'grief. Freiligrath allowed himself to be misled by Gottfried's melodramatic scenes into writing a poem about Johannab which he already regrets. For he has come to realise, firstly, that Gottfried is merry as a grig, and secondly that he immediately used the poem to disseminate to all and sundry the lie that Freiligrath had entered into an alliance with him and broken with us. A week later, in an attempt to exploit the Kinkel REVIVAL sparked off by his wife's death, Gottfried published in London a weekly dubbed the Hermann; unless this is the Hermann sung by Schönaichc and crowned by Gottsched,366 the title ought to be Gottfried. In the first place the rag preaches peace with God and the world,d and secondly it is nothing more than a puff for Mr Gottfried vis-à-vis German Philistia in the City of London. Nothing more pitiful has ever seen the light of day, and we can thank our stars that the 10 years of exile have so completely laid bare the hollowness of our democratic friends. The Kölnische Zeitung is witty and daring by com- parison.

[^1]: a twist - b F. Freiligrath, 'Nach Johanna Kinkels Begräbnis', 20 November 1858. - <-" Ch. O. von Schönaich, Hermann, oder das befreyte Deutschland - d A pun: Gottfried (Kinkel's sun na-)—Oott (God)+Friede (peace)



