---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "207. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 1 February "
Page_Range: "411-415"
---

# 207. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 1 February 

The wind of revolution which is blowing across the Continent of Europe has, of course, awakened all the great men367 from their winter sleep.

At the same time as this letter, I am sending one—indeed, my first—to Komp. I have given up associations—organised ones. They were, I thought, compromising for our friends in Germany. Over here, on the other hand, after the dirty tricks I have suffered at the hands of the louts who have allowed themselves to be used as mere tools against myself by a Kinkel, a Willich or some other such humbug, and since the Cologne trial," I have withdrawn completely into my study. My time was too precious to be wasted in fruitless endeavour and petty squabbles.

And now for essentials. My Critique of Political Economy is to be published in instalments (the first ones in a week or ten days' timea) by Franz Duncker of Berlin (Bessersche Verlagsbuchhand- lung). It was only thanks to Lassalle's extraordinary zeal and powers of persuasion that Duncker was induced to take this step. He has, however, left himself a loophole. A firm contract depends on the sale of the first instalments.

I divide the whole of political economy into 6 books. Capital; landed property; wage labour; the State; foreign trade; world market.

Book I, on capital, comprises 4 sections. Section I: Capital in general comprises 3 chapters, 1. The Commodity; 2. Money, or simple circulation; 3. Capital. 1 and 2, ABOUT 10 sheets, make up the contents of the first instalments to be published. You will understand the political motives that led me to hold back the third chapter on 'Capital' until I have again become established.

The contents of the instalments now being published are as follows:

[^1]: a A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy





**[p. 377]**

Chapter Two: Money or simple circulation 1. Measure of value B. Theories of the standard of money. (Late 17th century, Locke and Lowndes, Bishop Berkeley (1750)b; Sir James Steuart; Lord Castlereagh; Thomas Atrwood; John Gray; Proudhonists.)

2. Medium of circulation

a) The metamorphosis of commodities b) The circulation of money c) Coin. Token of value 3. Money

a) Hoarding b) Means of payment

c) MONEY OF THE WORLD 4. The Precious metab C. Theories of the medium of circulation and of money. {Monetary system; Spectator,368 Montesquieu, David Hume; Sir James Steuart; A. Smith, J.-B. Say; Bullion Committee,0 Ricardo, James Mill; Lord Overstone and school; Thomas Tooke (James Wilson, John Fullarton).}

In these two chapters the Proudhonist socialism now FASHIONABLE in France—which wants to retain private production while organising the exchange of private products, to have commodities but not money—is demolished to its very foundations. Commu- nism must above all rid itself of this 'false brother'.*1 But apart from all polemical aims, the analysis of simple money forms is, you know, the most difficult because the most abstract part of political economy.

I hope to win a scientific victory for our party. But the latter must itself now show whether its numbers are great enough to buy enough copies to banish the publisher's 'moral scruples'. The continuation of the venture depends on the sale of the first

[^1]: a B. Franklin, A Modest Inquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency. - b G. Berkeley, The Querist - c This refers to Report from the Select Committee on the High Price of Gold Bullion - d Cf. 2 Corinthians 11:26





**[p. 378]**

RIGHT.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, No. 32, 1906-07 and in full in: ^ t l . , J . . . . „ r , Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Published in English in full for the Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 f l r s t u m e

208

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE82

IN BERLIN

London, 2 February 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

The manuscript" went off from here on 26 January; by 31 January notification had already got back here from Berlin that the manuscript had arrived. The parcels company received this notification from their correspondent. On the other hand there is your letter dated 31 January in which you say the manuscript hasn't arrived. So whatever the circumstances the Prussian govern- ment— friend Stieber perhaps—has spent 3 days rummaging throughb the manuscript. Legally, so far as I am aware, all they were empowered to do was ascertain whether the parcel contained Brussels lace, other parcels being no concern of theirs. Who is going to assure me that some junior official hasn't amused himself by using a page or 2 for spills?

I presume that, in its own interest, the Prussian government hasn't taken any FALSE STEPS with my manuscript. Otherwise I should see to it that all hell was let loose in the London press (Times, etc.).

[^1]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - b Marx makes a pun on the name Stieber and the verb durchstöbern (rummage through).





**[p. 379]**

Your piece, BY THE BY, pleased me enormously. My wife sends her kindest regards; now that her cher frère has been dismissed,3 she believes that manuscripts, at any rate, may safely be sent to Berlin.

Salut.

Your

K. Marx

I may bring out an English version of the first instalments straight away. Duncker must put on the title-page: *'The author reserves to himself the right of translation'.*

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

209

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 2 February 1859

DEAR Frederick,

The Constitutionnel wins since, according to The Times, the author was none other than Mr Boustrapa.369

Today came a letter (which I'll send you later) from Lassalle saying that the manuscript0 has not yet arrived. Now take note: It went off on Tuesday (25); I was notified as early as 30th January by the PACKET COMPANY here that the manuscript had arrived in Berlin. Lassalle's letter is dated 31 January. Hence the government has been holding back my manuscript for 3 or 4 days at least (if Duncker got the manuscript after Lassalle's letter went off). Maybe Mr Stieber has been rummaging through0 it, or Mr von Patow has been endeavouring to make a hasty acquaintance with economics.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a This refers to Ferdinand von Westphalen, Jenny Marx's stepbrother, who until October 1859 was Prussian Minister of the Interior. - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - c Marx makes a pun on the name Stieber and the verb durchstöbern (rummage through).



