---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "208. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 2 February "
Page_Range: "415-416"
---

# 208. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 2 February 



**[p. 380]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Yol. XXII, . . . . . . * , , - . , , - Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time

210

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE100

IN BERLIN

London, 4 February 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

I've not yet had an acknowledgment of receipt from Mr Duncker and am therefore still in doubt whether the manuscript3

is yet out of the clutches of the authorities. You will see from the enclosed note that it left London on 26 January.

Ad vocem bellumh: The general view here is that war in Italy is inevitable.370 This much is certain: Mr Emmanuelc is in earnest and Mr Bonaparte was in earnest. What has swayed the latter is 1. Fear of Italian daggers.371 Since Orsini's death, he has been constantly engaged in secret 'intrigues with the Carbonari, the go-between being Plon-Plon, the husband of 'Clotilde'.d 2. An exceedingly bleak financial situation: it is, in fact, impossible to go on feeding the French army 'in peacetime'; Lombardy is fat and fertile. Moreover a war would again make 'war loans' possible. Any other loan is 'impossible'. 3. Over the last two years Bonaparte's repute has dwindled daily amongst all parties in France, and his diplomatic TRANSACTIONS have also been a succession of FAILURES. So

[^1]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - b As regards the war - c Victor Emmanuel II - d Clotilde, the Princess of Savoy



