---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "209. Marx to Engels. 2 February "
Page_Range: "416-417"
---

# 209. Marx to Engels. 2 February 



**[p. 381]**

On the other hand one may be perfectly sure that Mr Louis Bonaparte is devilishly afraid of a really serious war. 1. The man is always full of misgivings and, like all gamblers, is far from resolute. He has always inched his way to the Rubicon,372 but those standing behind him have invariably had to chuck him in. In every case—Boulogne, Strasbourg, December 1851s73—he was, in the end, forced to proceed in earnest with his plans. 2. The exceptionally cool reception accorded his scheme in France is not encouraging, of course. The masses appear to be INDIFFERENT. On the other hand there have been outright and earnest remonstra- tions against it on the part of high finance, trade and industry, the clerical party and, finally, the senior generals (Pélissier, for example, and Canrobert). Indeed, prospects on the military side are far from rosy, even if the braggadocio in the Constitutionnel"" is taken at its face value. Assuming France can muster all in all 700,000 men, 580,000 of these, at the very highest estimate, will be fit for military service. Deduct 50,000 for Algiers; 49,000 gendarmes, etc.; 100,000 (minimum) for guarding the cities (Paris,

[^1]: a Napoleon III, Decree on grain reserves of 16 November 1858, Le Moniteur universel, No. 322, 18 November 1858. - b Jerome Bonaparte - c This refers to the article marked 'L. Boniface. Paris, le 29 janvier' in Le Constitutionnel, No. 30, 30 January 1859.



