---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "210. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 4 February "
Page_Range: "417-420"
---

# 210. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 4 February 

However that may be, if Mr Bonaparte draws back now, he will be done for so far as the bulk of the French army is concerned; and this might ultimately induce him to go ahead after all.

You apparently believe that in the event of such a war Hungary would rise. I very much doubt it. Austria will, of course, place a corps on the Galician-Hungarian frontier to observe the Russians, and this will simultaneously keep the Hungarians in check. The Hungarian regiments (in so far as they have not—and many of them already have—been dispersed among their enemies, e.g. the Czechs, Serbs, Slovenes, etc.) will be stationed in German provinces.

The war would, of course, have serious, and without doubt ultimately revolutionary consequences. But initially it will maintain Bonapartism in France, set back the internal movement within England and Russia, revive the pettiest nationalist passions in Germany, etc., and hence, in my view, its initial effect will everywhere be counter-revolutionary.

Be that as it may, you should expect nothing of the émigrés here. Apart from Mazzini who, at least, is a fanatic, they're a bunch of confidence tricksters whose one ambition is to extract money from the English. Mr Kossuth has positively sunk to the level of an itinerant LECTURER who hawks the same old nonsense round the various PROVINCES of England and Scotland and sells it over and over again to ever new audiences.a

The scoundrels here have all become so conservative that they would indeed deserve to be amnestied. Mr Gottfried Kinkel, for example, is publishing a weekly here, Hermann by name, compared with which even the Kölnische Zeitung is a daring and witty paper. (By indulging in sundry flirtations with aesthetic Jewesses, the suave, melodramatic parson is said, amongst other things, to have driven his wife to fall out of the window and break her neck. Freiligrath, being a kind-hearted fellow, was so taken in by the scenes of grief that he wrote a poem about the late Johanna Mockel,b only to discover a day or two later that the grief was

[^1]: a Kossuth's lectures were published in Brussels in 1859 under the title L'Europe, l'Autriche et la Hongrie. - b F. Freiligrath, 'Nach Johanna Kinkels Begräbnis'.





**[p. 383]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

It would be a great help to me if you could obtain in Breslau/ and let me have as soon as possible, particulars about a person of the female sex by the name (allegedly) of von Paula-Kröcher, who used to live there and is now over here.

211

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 February 1859

Dear Engels,

It's a fortnight ago today since 1 sent the manuscript5 to Berlin; since then 2 letters have gone off to Lassalle: up to this moment I've had no acknowledgment of receipt. Moreover, I had made this 'acknowledgment of receipt' a condition for the despatch of

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- , , ,. . gart-Berlin 1922 Published in English in tull tor the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Wroclaw - h K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique uf Political Economy.





**[p. 384]**

Herewith Lassalle's letter. Let me have it back. Today I have written about Bonaparte's rotten speech and his pamphlet.3375

Salu L

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 19,13 Published in English for the first time

212

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 February 1859

Dear Engels,

- At last a letter from Duncker today. He didn't receive the manuscript11 until 1 February. Not printed this week, because just completing some work or other—I don't know which—of Lassalle's/

Enclosed a letter from Eccarius and Pfänder from which you will see that poor Eccarius is down with consumption. This is the most tragic thing I have yet experienced here in London.

Pieper, who had been discharged as cured, is back from Bognor again and in the German hospital. This time starvation treatment.

Dronke has been to Bonn, where one of his brothers was dying. Having obtained Flottwell's permission, he attended a ball given by

[^1]: SERVES HIM RIGHT.

[^2]: I meant to send you the enclosed letters from Weydemeyer and Komp long ago.321 I have at last replied to them.d

[^3]: a This refers to 'Discours de S. M. L'Empereur. Session législative de 1859' (Le Moniteur universel, No. 39, special edition, 7 February 1859) and the pamphlet inspired by Napoleon III: [A. La Guéronnière,] L'Empereur Napoléon III et l'Italie. - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - c F. Lassalle, Franz von Sickingen. - d See this volume, pp. 324, 338 and 374-78.



