---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "211. Marx to Engels. 8 February "
Page_Range: "420-421"
---

# 211. Marx to Engels. 8 February 



**[p. 385]**

From the latter, who came to see me yesterday (I myself being confined to the house with a bad throat), I also learned that Gottfried's—or Hermann'sc—behaviour towards ladies is invari- ably so ludicrous (the buffoon now supposes he need only throw down his handkerchief) that he has become an object of general dégoût.d Moreover, Freiligrath has now also tumbled to the fact that Gottfried feels exceptionally 'FREE AND EASY' now that the Mockel woman e is dead and—strangest of all—it now transpires that, even before the day of the funeral, philistine Freiligrath and wife had discovered brother Hermann's 'lack of concern'.

According to Gottfried, the Hermann, to which the Prussian government has, as the Berlin National-Zeitung announces, granted a licence for postal distribution, is to cover the 'loss' to his funds occasioned by his wife's death.

In due course, no doubt, Mrs Daniels will become Mrs Bürgers. She has written to Linaf saying that 'Bürgers has grown still more energetic and self-confident'. In proof of that 'self-confidence' she writes, 'we are delighted by Freiligrath's poem about Mrs Kinkel/ which was mutilated by the "perfidious" Kölnische Zeitung'.

Steffen has written to Freiligrath asking for your address and mine as he has lost them. Steffen's address is: W. Steffen, Harrison Square near Boston, Mass. U. St.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, t I m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a Ernst Dronke - b Deutsches Museum - c An allusion to the weekly Hermann published by Gottfried Kinkel. - d disgust - e Johanna Kinkel - f Caroline Schöler - R F. Freiligrath, 'Nach Johanna Kinkels Begräbnis'.

[^4]: 14-194



