---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "212. Marx to Engels. 9 February "
Page_Range: "421-423"
---

# 212. Marx to Engels. 9 February 



**[p. 213]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 February 1859 Dear Moor,

The news about Eccarius is truly staggering. What a heroic letter he wrote you!3'6 That such a fine chap should come to such a pitiful end! We are losing our best men during this wretched period of peace, and the new blood is very pauvre.'

Herewith Lassalle's letter. I'm glad the manuscriptb has arrived. What did Freiligrath have to say concerning my letter about Kinkel'? To me he wrote, 'ALL RIGHT, ALL RIGHT' and said he had given his answer to you. So you still owe it to me.

I am going home now and shall get an article on the Austrian and German federal army done in time for the 2nd post.

Your

F. E.

214

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 14 February 1859

Dear Marx,

Something I forgot to mention. Certainly you must reserve the translation rights on your book.' Even if only to stop some jackass or industrialis' from massacring the thing. Moreover it is now a

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, , . ,. , , , ]C)i3 Published in English tor the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: •' poor - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - ' See this volume, pp. 370-71. - d F. Engels, 'German Resources for War'. - e K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.





**[p. 387]**

Statesman Blind has a friend in the telegraph office who occasionally sends the provincial papers some pretty tall stories by telegraph. More about this anon.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

215

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 February 1859

Dear Engels,

Herewith:

1. Letter from my brother-in-law (the CAPE MAN) a from which you will see that the fellow will be landing in London tomorrow. Since I am sans souh (only last Saturday I had to pawn my wife's last 'spare' skirt in order to send Eccarius SOME COMFORTS) and have got to entertain the man decently—he is going to Trier and carries some weight in the TRANSACTIONS with my mother'—I must once again press you to mail me AT LEAST £1. Luckily I have what is known as mumps, which means that I only have to entertain the man here at home and, as an invalid, can refuse to do any gadding about.

2. Letter from Eccarius. I had told the latter (who seemed, I thought, to be improving a little) that if he needed wine he was to let me know. So you should send him ABOUT 2 BOTTLES OF port wine.

3. 2 enclosures from The Free Press (the more important for having been reprinted from The New York Herald) will give you some idea of the Chinese war332 and Mr Palmerston's policy.d

[^1]: a Johann Carl Juta - b penniless - c Henriette Marx - d 'Revelation by a Russian of the Object of the Chinese War and Treaty', The Free Press, No. 24, 22 Decem- ber 1858.



