---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "215. Marx to Engels. 15 February "
Page_Range: "424-426"
---

# 215. Marx to Engels. 15 February 

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

216

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, about 22 February 1859]37S

DEAR Frederick,

My brother-in-law" will be travelling to Manchester on Thursday and will probably come and see you on Friday. But you must let me have your exact address. On closer acquaintance, by the by, Juta proves to be a far from [healthy] b chap. He suffers damnably from his liver, and hence must go to Carlsbad.0 I should be glad if Gumpert would examine him and, since his liver is presently giving him a great deal of pain, do something to alleviate this. But if the thing is really serious, Gumpert must not give any indication of the fact.

Your

K. M.

Nota bene. I have written asking Dana whether he can find me a YANKEE for the English edition of the Political Economy.' In which case, if the

[^1]: T o m o r r o w I am writing about the FACTORY REPORT,11 and expect an article from you, the more so as I am now working out Capital.555

[^2]: a Johann Carl Juta - b Ms. damaged. - c Karlovy Vary - d Marx means his article 'The State of British Manufactures', for which he used data from Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, for the Half Year Ending 31st October 1858. - <= K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.





**[p. 390]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time 217

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 February 1859 Dear Engels,

The bearer of these lines is my brother-in-law Juta, whom I most warmly recommend to you.

Your

K. Marx Eccarius received the wine on Saturday and believes he can already feel the benefit of it. It seems probable that the wine will help him pull through.

MARX TO FRANZ DUNCKER

London, 23 February 1859 Dear Sir,

The 'Preface'" enclosed herewith.

Yours very faithfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time 218

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: First published in International Review of Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. X, Part 1, 1965

[^4]: Published in English for the first

[^5]: •' to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



