---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "220. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 25 February "
Page_Range: "428-430"
---

# 220. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 25 February 



**[p. 393]**

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin. 1922 Published in English in full for the first time

221

MARX TO ENGELS1

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 February' 1859 Dear Engels,

Po and Rhine is a first-class idea and must be put in hand straight away.379 You must set to at once, time being everything in this case. I have written to Lassalle this very day and am sure that little Jew Braun will put the thing through.

The pamphlet (HOW MANY SHEETS? Let me have the answer to this by return) must first appear anonymously so that the public believes the author to be an eminent general. In the second edition, which you may account a certainty provided the thing comes out on time, you will reveal your identity in a 6-I.INF. foreword, and then it will be a triumph for our party. In my 'Preface'b I have done you a few honneurs; and thus it is all to the good if you yourself take the stage immediately afterwards.

Those dogs of democrats and liberal riff-raff will see that we're the only chaps who haven't been stultified by the ghastly period of peace.

In any case, you'll get the copies of the Tribune. Not one of the military articles'^ has so far been published. Mr Dana didn't print the first, which you wrote A LONG TIME AGO, but will probably do so now. I too constantly experience the like. It's often three months before the asses discover that we've foretold EVENTS for them, whereupon they print the relevant articles.

[^1]: a A slip of the pen in the original: 29 February. - b to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - ' Marx presumably means Engels' articles 'German Resources for War' and 'The Austrian Hold on Italy'.





**[p. 394]**

Salut.

- Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . , . , , . ^ ,. • . r .. r i Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and ^ ' ' ^ m E " g ' , S h ' " f u " f ° r t h e

Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

first time

222

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 February 1859

Dear Engels,

[^1]: I am writing to you again this evening because TIME PRESSES. I am morally convinced that, in view of what I've written to Lassalle, Duncker will accept the pamphlet. b Admittedly, little Jew Braun hasn't written to me since my manuscript 0 arrived, and that was over four weeks ago. For one thing, he was busy with the publication of his own immortal, 'inflammatory' work d (STILL, the little Jew, even his Heraclitus," although atrociously written, is BETTER THAN ANYTHING THE DEMOCRATS COULD BOAST OF), and then he will probably have to do the final proof-reading of my scrawl. For another thing, he may be a trifle stunned by the terrible knock on the head dealt him indirectly by my analysis of money. For his Heraclitus contains the following note which I shall now quote verbatim despite its interminable length (you've got to read it, though):

[^2]: 'If we remarked above that in the said fragment Heraclitus has specified the true nature and function of money in political economy' (Heraclitus in fact says:

[^3]: a Johann Carl Juta - b F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - ' A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - d F. Lassalle, Franz von Sickingen. - e F. Lassalle, Die Philosophie Herakleilos des Dunklen von Ephesos. Further on Marx quotes Note 3 to p. 224 of Vol. I of this work.



