---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "222. Marx to Engels. 25 February "
Page_Range: "431-435"
---

# 222. Marx to Engels. 25 February 



**[p. 396]**

Ricardos studies and have by no means found universal acceptance, follow from the mere consequence of that speculative concept discerned by Heraclitus.'

I, of course, paid not the slightest heed to this Talmudic wisdom but roundly slated Ricardo for his theory of money which, by the way, did not originate with him but with Hume and Montesquieu. So Lassalle may feel this to be a personal insult. There was actually no harm in it, for in my anti-Proudhon piece" I myself adopted Ricardo's theory. But I'd had a perfecdy ridiculous letter from little Jew Braun in which he said that he had 'the early publication of my manuscript at heart, although he himself was engaged in writing a major work on political economy'278 for which he had 'allocated two years'. But if I were to 'deprive him of too much that was new, he might abandon the whole thing'. WELL, to this I replied that there was no fear of rivalry since this 'new' science could accommodate himself and me and a dozen more besides.b

My disquisition on money will now show him, either that I know nothing of the subject—although if I'm wrong, so is the whole history of the monetary theory—or else that he is an ass, since, with a few empty abstract expressions such as 'abstract unit', he presumes to lay down the law about empirical matters which, if one wishes to hold forth about them, call for study, and prolonged study INTO THE BARGAIN. For this reason he may, in the innermost recesses of his heart, be nourishing something of a grudge against me just now. But—and this is what I have been leading up to—firstly, Lassalle has really too great a stake 'in the cause' and, secondly, he is too much of an 'Ephraim Artful' not to keep in with us coûte que coûte,c which is all the more necessary to him because of his quarrel with the Düsseldorf people.d Moreover, living in Berlin has made him see that, for an energetic fellow like himself, the bourgeois party holds out no prospects what- ever.381

So with clever MANAGEMENT the man will be ours, body and soul, no matter how much he indulges in 'inflammatory' antics or makes

[^1]: 11 The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the Philosophy of Poverty by M. Proudhan - b See this volume, p. 355. - c cost what it may - d See this volume, pp. 23-24 and 27.





**[p. 397]**

Hence I consider it certain that Duncker will take the pamphlet, so the main thing now is for you to set to work on it at once, for this is like a newspaper article. There's no time to be lost. For the same reason—immediacy of impact—I believe you shouldn't exceed 4 or 5 sheets (if as much is needed). So you may regard yourself as totally absolved from the Tribune work (unless some martial occurrence steals a march on your pamphlet, which is improbable), until you've finished the thing. The most sensible thing to do would be to plead sudden illness and stay away from the office, so as to write the thing all at one go.

Amicus Engels Senior, amicus Ermen (Gotofredus!), sed magis amicum TÔ <ppoveîv'.b

'<peû, <peü, tppovetv OK ÔELVOV, êv-da y.i] TÉKT] \vei ippovoivri,'c

as your old man might say to you, like Tiresias did to King Oedipus, to which, however, you would reply that he

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: '«èv TOÎÇ xép Seox pôvov SéSopxe, TT)V TÉXVTIV 8'è'ipv TU<p\6<;»'.d

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart. 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a in case of need - b Engels Senior is dear to me, Ermen (Gottfried!) is dear to me, but knowledge is dearer still. An adaptation of 'Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis arnica Veritas'—'Plato is dear to me, Socrates is dear to me, but truth is dearer still' (Ammonius Saccas, Vita Aristoteles). - c 'Alas, 'tis terrible to be wise when it brings the wise man no reward' (Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus, 324, 325). - ll 'In usury but sharp-eyed, yet in his sooth-saying blind' (Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus, 396, 397).

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 223]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 March 1859

Dear Engels,

From the enclosed letter of Lassalle's382 you will see that I know my men and what MANAGEMENT means.

As regards the letter, I would make the following observations:

1. You must now really follow my advice and shun the office altogether for a few days. I did, of course, put the thing in such a way as to suggest that I'd already read your manuscript.3 A few days here or there are of no importance, but if you only work in the evenings you won't finish in time.

2. In your position you cannot agree to the small fee but must, if only honoris causa, settle for the alternative of half the net profits.

3. Lassalle's direction that you send the title (i.e. not write it on the manuscript), the foreword (which I'd suggest you don't write) and the table of contents to him personally (F. Lassalle, 131 Potsdamer Strasse, Berlin), is a sensible one. For parcels are being opened by the Post Office, and the government mustn't know the title, which would give them the key to the whole secret.

The manuscript, on the other hand, I shall send from here, as I sent my own manuscriptb (i.e. insured), to Duncker via Fräulein Ludmilla Assing. Only I'll get Pfänder to put himself down as the sender.

4. You should indeed include something national, anti- Bonapartist, but the tone should be careful and gentlemanly. You can the more readily employ this colour in that the intention of your pamphlet is, IN FACT, a great victory for Mazzini vis-à-vis the National Assembly of 1848 (Radowitzc-Mincio),383 and you enable Germans for the first time to interest themselves with a good conscience in Italy's emancipation.

Your K. M.

[^1]: N o w , GOOD-BYE, OLD BOY.

[^2]: a Po and Rhine (see this volume, pp. 391-92) - b A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - c Marx refers to J. M. von Radowitz's speech of 12 August 1848 in the Frankfurt National Assembly.



First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

224

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 4 March 1859

Dear Moor,

Little Jew Braund has managed things well; I agree to half the net profits. The work is going ahead fairly quickly," 9 long double pages of the kind I send you for the Tribune are ready, 2 or 3 more will see the finish of the Po and then comes the Rhine, which won't be as long—barely 3 sheets in all. This evening, Saturday and Sunday will certainly dispose of the better part of the thing, and I shall let you have it by Wednesday, provided all goes smoothly. However I must be on my guard since I'll have all the official military writers against me, and if they can pick any holes in the thing they'll certainly do so. So better too short than too long, and the historical examples can be done quite briefly. Besides, if the manuscript arrives in Berlin at the end of next week, it will be soon enough; after all, there's going to be war.370

So there's no need to worry about time. It's impossible just now to absent myself from the WAREHOUSE for several days. There's no real need and it wouldn't be much help. What holds one up is poring

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: " A reference to the weekly Hermann edited by Gottfried Kinkel. - b 'Commerzielle Briefe' and 'Amerikanische Literatur. Trübner's Bibliographical Guide to American Literature', Hermann, No. 7, 19 February 1859. - c Persevere in thy valour, o youth! (Virgil, Aeneid, IX, 641.) - d Ferdinand Lassalle - e Engels' work on Po and Rhine



