---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "223. Marx to Engels. 3 March "
Page_Range: "435-436"
---

# 223. Marx to Engels. 3 March 



**[p. 400]**

I'm not doing a foreword. That would be asking for too much.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, „ ,,. , , . _ .. , r . r. j Q.o Published in English tor the first time

225

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 March 1859

Dear Engels,

Pamphlet1' received. Will run to about 4 printed sheets if not more, considering the way pamphlets are printed. Have read it all; EXCEEDINGLY CLEVER; the political side is also splendidly done and that was damned difficult. THE PAMPHLET WILL HAVE A GREAT SUCCESS.

I've deleted nothing but one short sentence about Reuss-Schleiz; not where you discuss the 'natural frontiers' of that state1 but in the first passage where it makes for double emploi6 and detracts from the effect.

I suggest that the subtitle 'Military Studies' detracts from the effect and should be deleted.

Should you be writing to Lassalle tomorrow I'd like you to do something in your own name which I can't do in mine. The FACTS are as follows: Last Monday (7 March) something arrived from Berlin! What do you think it was? The first proof-sheet' and since then I have not had another. Contrary to what Mr Duncker expressly said in his letter, they did nothing at all about my manuscript for 6 weeks and would now seem to be printing 1 sheet a week. When your manuscript arrives they'll perhaps break off again and thus the thing may drag on for months. I find this quite deplorable,

[^1]: a with breaks in between - b F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - c See present edition, Vol. 16, p. 250. - d duplication - e of K. Marx's A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



