---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "226. Engels to Ferdinand Lassalle. 14 March "
Page_Range: "439-440"
---

# 226. Engels to Ferdinand Lassalle. 14 March 



**[p. 404]**

Kinkel's paper is doing excellent business. Prudently, he has quite given up writing himself. The money comes partly from a Dr Juch and partly from the Portuguese Jew, Castello (an old Portuguese financial house), who was talked into it by the great Gerstenberg.'1

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart. 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l r n e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

228

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

London, 16 March 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

Your latest work b and accompanying letter have not yet arrived, nor are they to be here so soon. Despatch through publisher's channels is about as expeditious as if you were to send me the things via Petersburg, Kamchatka and North America.

Owing to circumstances which I can't go into today (for I am dictating an article in English d while writing this note to you), I am very hard pressed for money. Might it be possible for you to carry out some sort of bill transaction for me in Berlin having a currency of a few weeks, in return for which you could subsequently take the fee Duncker owes me?

[^1]: If it's not too late, get them to print 'THE RIGHT OF TRANSLATION IS RESERVED' on the last manuscript1 I sent you. Otherwise some of the German clowns over here might massacre the thing.

[^2]: a The letter is unsigned. - l> Franz von Sickingen - < F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - •' K. Marx, 'The War Prospect in Prussia'.



