---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "227. Marx to Engels. 16 March "
Page_Range: "440-441"
---

# 227. Marx to Engels. 16 March 

There's one factor, by the by, which you must not overlook; Russia is stirring up the whole thing, and her ally, Palmerston (you only have to look at The Times) is doing all he can to drive Bonaparte to war. On top of that there'll soon be a change of ministry here, and then Palmerston will run the thing direct.385

The pro-Poerio, etc., demonstrations here are wholly inspired by him. He has placed his son-in-law, Lord Shaftesbury, at the head of these, AS RESPONSIBLE EDITOR.38

I am now, AFTER ALL, beginning to believe that the war might hold out some prospects for us as well.

Salut.

Your

K. M. Don't forget, by the by, that if you write to me about certain conditions, it will benefit a vast public, amongst whom a great many Germans. The Tribune numbers some 200,000 regular subscribers.

229

MARX TO FRANZ DUNCKER

[London,] 17TH MARCH 1859 Dear Sir,

I am returning the proofsc in an envelope because advised by the Post Office over here that, while proofs may be sent from

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. Ill, Stutt- _ , ,. , , . _ ,. . r , r. Uart-Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first °' ' ' time

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: •' 'There's no two opinions about it in Paris. We shall have war.' - b i.e., about the position in Germany (see this volume, p. 391) - c of the book A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



