---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "228. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 16 March "
Page_Range: "441-442"
---

# 228. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 16 March 



**[p. 406]**

Page 32, in the final lines I forgot to amend 'more profound economic differences between English and French, etc., political economy' to 'more profound fundamental, e t c ' My memory may be deceiving me, but it seems to me that the beginnings of the sentences on p. 33, both in the text and in the first note, were missing on p. 32.

Yours very faithfully,

K. M.

First published in International Review of Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. X, Part 1, 1965 , , ,. Published in English for the first time

230

MARX T O ENGELS 3 8*

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 22 March 1859]

Dear Engels,

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Herewith Eccarius' letter. Unfortunately he had to return to his tailor's sweat-shop for which, or so it seems to me, he is by no means sufficiently recovered. I wrote about the Reform Bill today389; you should write (if your eyes [are alright], as I hope—otherwise, OF COURSE, DONT THINK or IT) about the likelihood of war.a This I regard as necessary, if the rascals on the Tribune are not to reprint anything.390 Nothing from Berlin. Only 3 proof-sheets received h in 8 weeks.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^3]: jgig Published in English for the first

[^4]: •' In response to this request Engels wrote the article 'War Inevitable'. - b of Marx's A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



