---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "229. Marx to Franz Duncker. 17 March "
Page_Range: "442-443"
---

# 229. Marx to Franz Duncker. 17 March 



**[p. 231]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 March [1859]

Dear Engels,

I think you have misunderstood Lassalle's letter.3

All he says is: 'I'm most anxious to see what the pamphletb contains. Marx's workc will alsobe appearing soon, etc' By this he means he has not read your pamphlet. Voilà tout.d The same affectation as in the case of my manuscript which he purports not to have read. I had a letter from him this morning which I shall send on to you later. Had your manuscript not arrived he would at least have told me.

Your manuscript left London the same day as it arrived. Pfänder was given a receipt for it. Anyway it is sure to have arrived. Duncker is A SLOW COACH. To date (8 WEEKS) I have had only 3 proof-sheets.

Your

K. M.

232

London, 28 March 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill Dear Lassalle,

Ad vocem' financial predicament: D'abord1 many thanks for your offers of help. In the meantime, however, I have tried other

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^2]: in]« Published in English for the first time

[^3]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE20

[^4]: IN BERLIN

[^5]: * Marx refers to Lassalle's letter to Engels of 21 March 1859. - b F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - c A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - d That's all. - e As regards - f First



