---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "232. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 March "
Page_Range: "444-447"
---

# 232. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 March 



**[p. 409]**

Ad vocem 'Presse': I accept this offer, too: Firstly, because, unlike last time, no conditions are imposed on me as regards the treatment of specific political personalities. I make it an absolute principle never to assent to a condition. On the other hand, every newspaper has a right to expect tact of its correspondents. Secondly, because times have changed and I now consider it essential that our party should secure positions wherever possible, even if only for a time, so that others should not gain possession of the terrain. For the time being, of course, it must be used cautiously, but the most important thing is to acquire influence at various points against more crucial contingencies. I. never received the copies of the Presse which you say Friedländer sent me, probably because they were wrongly addressed. I ought, by the by, to be sent a few numbers immediately; one has to find out from the actual paper how, not what, one should write for the Viennese public.

Ad vocem your writing for the 'Presse'. I am quite convinced you should write for them. True, it would be 'improper' for you, as a Prussian, to write for an Austrian paper just now. But on principle we should, as Luther says of God, 'use a thief to catch a thief',3

and whenever we get the chance, contribute to the general state of disintegration and confusion. Before the start of the present troubles I would neither have written for the Presse myself, nor have advised you to do so. But the fermentation process has begun and now it's up to everyone to do what he can. It is now advisable to infiltrate poison, no matter where. Should we confine ourselves to writing for papers which on the whole share our viewpoint, we'd have to postpone all journalistic activity indefinite- ly. And should one really allow so-called 'PUBLIC OPINION' to have nothing but counter-revolutionary stuff pumped into it?

Ad vocem 'Tribune': You certainly misunderstood me if you thought I was asking you to take the Tribunes subscribers into account. The fact of the matter is this: My real business with the Tribune consists in writing leaders about anything I choose. Here, England heads the bill and France comes second. Much is of an

[^1]: 11 M. Luther, Von Kauffshandlung und Wucher.





**[p. 410]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

P.S. Have just received a letter from Nutt, the City booksellers, advising me that your parcel has arrived. I shall collect it without fail today.

What is happening about Engels' pamphletb? I sent it off on the 10TH OF MARCH. I'd have thought this kind of thing could have been done in 5 days.

233

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 1 April 1859 Dear Engels,

Herewith letter from Lassalle. Herewith letter from Dana, which you must return. I shall wait to hear from you before answering it.393

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin 1922 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: Hence these tears (Terence, Andria, I, i, 99). - b Po and Rhine





**[p. 411]**

So Palmerston, as was decided at Compiègne 3 5 6 (but in effect at Petersburg), is to return to the MINISTRY whatever its denomination. Without him Russia could not allow a war. Now, as in 1852 and 1855, Bright and Russell have pulled the chestnuts out of the fire for him.

By the by, the debate in parliament was very funny. T h e Whigs and Radicals attacked the Tories largely on the grounds of their being REVOLUTIONISTS. Here, Bright's and Gibson's role most abject. (The latter even went so far as to declaim romantically against ELECTORAL DISTRICTS.395) O n the other hand, the farce of Tories, in the name of the MIDDLE CLASS, advocating their own rubbish in opposition to Whigs and MIDDLE CLASS, who advocate theirs in the name of the WORKING CLASS. A sign of great progress in England.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

234

MARX T O FERDINAND LASSALLE

London, 4 April 1859

Dear Lassalle,

All my attempts to raise money have failed. I have also had an answer in the negative from home—you know how much attached

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: K. Marx, 'Great Trouble in Indian Finances'.

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



