---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "235. Marx to Engels. 9 April "
Page_Range: "449-451"
---

# 235. Marx to Engels. 9 April 



**[p. 236]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Monday, 11 April 1859

D.M.,

Article for Friday on war.a The Austrians evidently intend to seize the initiative after all. Very sensible. If I'm not mistaken I have already sent the plan of the war to the Tribuneb: An Austrian offensive to defeat, first, the Piedmontese and then the invading French severally as they debouch from Mont Cenis, Mont Genèvre, the Col di Tenda and Bocchetta—was that it? I can no longer remember exactly. It'll be a very jolly affair.

What clever-clever SLOW COACHES they are in Berlin. They can't even print a pamphlet'! I've heard absolutely nothing more—it's enough to drive one insane.

En attendant, vive la guerre!d In 10 days' time they will, I hope, be at each other's throats in Alessandria or Casale, and then who knows what kind of foxes I shall be hunting next SEASON!

Your

F. E.

237

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 12 April 1859 Dear Engels,

Yesterday Lassalle wrote to me about your pamphlet' as follows:

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'War Inevitable'. - b F. Engels, 'Chances of the Impending War'. - r This refers to Engels' Po and Rhine. - d In the meantime, three cheers for war! - e Po and Rhine





**[p. 415]**

'Engels' pamphlet came out 3 days ago. Today I am sending him two copies by book post, as I shall do each day for 6 days in succession. For this is the only way we could devise' (!) 'of avoiding heavy postal charges on the one hand and, on the other, preventing certain persons from guessing who was the pamphlet's author. Write and tell him this.'3

Have you ever known such tomfoolery? To distract attention from you, they send you copies by book post '6 days in succession'!

Of the thing itself Lassalle writes:

'The pamphlet is truly impressive by reason of the pungency and sterling quality of the strategic knowledge evinced therein.'

(The 'pungency' of 'knowledge' may be regarded as a lapsus pennae}')

As to my own affair,' Lassalle writes:

'Duncker tells me that the instalments will be ready by mid-May.'

(So that's another month's delay.)

'He maintains he is getting on with the printing as quickly as he can. At any rate you are utterly wrong in supposing that he is deliberately dragging his feet. He's always rather slow.'

What I do know, however, is that another 10 days have gone by without my getting a proof-sheet.

Apropos. The Neue Zeit is on its last legs. Mr Edgar, who actually ended up by gracing its columns with a short story of his own contriving,* resigned a week ago—realising that the world was thoroughly unamenable to his genius. Last Saturday6 it came out as a half number, and this week will probably see the end of it. The Hermann, too, according to current rumour, will soon depart this life. A good thing the curs snatched so eagerly at the opportunity of thus shamelessly laying bare their nonentity before all the world. Kinkel has KILLED the Kinkel humbug with his own hand. The CLOWN,' for his part, has found out just how 'easy' it is to take our place in communist literature.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: a Here and below Marx quotes Lassalle's letter to him of 8 April 1859 (the italics are Marx's). - b slip of the pen - ' i.e. the publication of the book A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - d E. Bauer, 'Das Kloster', Die Neue Zeit, Nos. 38-42, 19 and 26 March and 2, 10 and 16 April 1859. -? 9 April - f Edgar Bauer



