---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "237. Marx to Engels. 12 April "
Page_Range: "451-453"
---

# 237. Marx to Engels. 12 April 



**[p. 416]**

Pas trop de zèle!b

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

238

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 16 April [1859]

Dear Engels,

I trust that by the time you get this note your toothache will have gone. It's a fiendish thing.

MEANWHILE I have made arrangements which, within a short time, will double my income and thus put an end to the habitual misery. Friedländer, Lassalle's cousin (sometime editor along with Eisner and Co. of the Neue Oder-Zeitung), present editor of the Presse in Vienna (which, en passant, has 24,000 subscribers), offered, in January 1858, to appoint me correspondent to his paper.254 I turned this down at the time because he stipulated that only Bonaparte, not Palmerston, be attacked. Now he has renewed the offer, ALL CONDITIONS LAID Asi DF. Since, however, this will as a rule involve only 1 article (20 frs) per week, it is comparatively unimportant. But I am at the same time to be their despatcher of telegrams (in French), 10 frs per telegram, and this, though time-consuming, is lucrative.

The only point that remains to be settled is that of instructions to a banking house in London, since telegraphing necessitates considerable expenditure. Negotiations—before the terms were SETTLED—extended over 3 weeks. It was only yesterday that I sent a definite answer to a letter received the same day from Vienna. So it will be 8-10 days before the thing gets under way.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: •> F. Engels, 'Chances of the Impending War' - h Not too much zeal! (The dictum is attributed to Talleyrand.)





**[p. 417]**

MEANWHILE the interest on our most valuable silver, watches, etc., is due for payment next Tuesday. By private TRANSACTIONS with the PAWNBROKER my wife has already put off the date of foreclosure for 3 weeks, but Tuesday is the ultimus terminus. So my request that you send m e a few pounds goes hand in hand with the hope that this will definitely be the last time and the tax upon you will cease for good.

Be so kind as to send 1 copy a for me. As soon as you are in possession of several, Freiligrath and Pfänder ought each to have one.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

239

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 19 April [1859]

Dear Engels,

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: 1. £ 5 ARRIVED. BEST THANKS. 2. I shall look out the Tribunes for you and send them IN THE COURSE OF THIS WEEK.

[^3]: 3. T h e Tribune which arrived today (dated 5 April) contains an attack (enclosed),b probably by some idiot of a Hungarian, which you should answer by Friday at the latest. T h e ANSWER of the 14TH INST'C to which the idiot alludes is not to hand. However his own REPETITION will tell you everything he said in HIS SHORT ANSWER.401

[^4]: 4. What did the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung say about your Tribune articles402?

[^5]: a F. Engels, Po and Rhine. - b [A.] Asbôth, '"Chances of the Impending War". To the Editor of The N. Y. Tribune'. New-York Daily Trifmne, No. 5602, 5 April 1859. - ' [A.] A[sb6th,] '"The Austrian Hold on Italy". To the Editor of The N. Y. Tribune', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5581, 11 March 1859.

[^6]: 15-194



