---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "238. Marx to Engels. 16 April "
Page_Range: "453-454"
---

# 238. Marx to Engels. 16 April 



**[p. 418]**

5. Yesterday I saw Duncker's advertisement for Po and Rhine in the Hamburger Correspondent

6. I myself have so far received 8 proof-sheets.3 So the thing's approaching its end, but no doubt it will be another fortnight before Duncker sends any more.

7. Ad vocemb Lassalle, I shall deal with this inter alia in a longer letter tomorrow.

Salut. ,. Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, IQ23 Published in English for the first time

240

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE403

IN BERLIN

London, 19 April 1859

Dear Lassalle,

I sent no separate acknowledgment of the £14 10/- because the letter was registered. But I should have written earlier had I not been plagued by a damned 'cousin from Holland',0 who laid claim to my surplus working time in THE MOST CRUEL MANNER.

Here in England the class struggle is progressing in a most gratifying way. Unfortunately there is no longer any Chartist paper in existence and hence I had to give up literary collaboration with that movement ABOUT two years ago.

Now I come to Franz von Sickingen. D'abord,' I must applaud

[^1]: HE IS NOW GONE, and so I can breathe again. Friedländer has written to me.d The terms are not as favourable as those originally communicated to you, but are nonetheless •RESPECTABLE.254 Once a few subsidiary points have been settled between us—which will, I think, be done in the course of this week—I shall write to him.

[^2]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - b As to - c Johann Carl Juta - d See this volume, p. 416. - e First



