---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "239. Marx to Engels. 19 April "
Page_Range: "454-455"
---

# 239. Marx to Engels. 19 April 



**[p. 419]**

Now for THE OTHER SIDE OF THE MEDAL: Firstly—and this is purely a question of form—since you have chosen to write in verse, you could have put a touch more artistry into the iambics. However, though your neglecting to do so might well shock a professional poet, I regard it by and large as a merit, our breed of poetical epigones having retained nothing but formal polish. Secondly, the implicit conflict is not just tragic; it is the tragic conflict upon which the revolutionary party of 1848-49 justly foundered. Hence making it the fulcrum of a modern tragedy can only meet with my wholehearted approval. But then, I ask myself, is the theme in question suitable for the portrayal of that conflict? Balthasar may indeed imagine that had Sickingen not pretended that his rebellion was a knightly feud, but had instead raised the standard of opposition to the emperor and open war against the princes, he would have won. But are we able to share that illusion? Sickingen (and with him Hütten, more or less) went under, not because of his cunning, but because, as a knight and as representative of a declining class, he rebelled against existing reality, or rather against the new form of existing reality. Strip Sickingen of the appurte- nances of the individual and his particular education, natural disposition, etc., and you have—Götz von Berlichingen. In this latter, miserable fellow the tragic opposition between knights on the one hand and emperor and princes on the other is adequately personified and that is why Goethe rightly made him his hero.2 In so far as Sickingen—and even Hütten up to a point, although in his case, as in that of all ideologists of a class, such assertions call for substantial modification—is fighting the princes (he turns against the emperorb only because the emperor of knights has become the emperor of princes), he is, in fact, nothing more than a Don Quixote, if with some historical justification. The fact that he begins his rebellion in the guise of a knightly feud merely means that he begins it in knightly fashion. Were he to begin it in any other way, he would have to appeal directly and at the very outset to the towns and the peasants, i.e. the very classes whose development=the negation of knighthood.

[^1]: a J. W. Goethe, Götz von Berlichingen. - b Charles V

[^2]: 15«



