---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "240. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 19 April "
Page_Range: "455-459"
---

# 240. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 19 April 



**[p. 420]**

Again, I miss what is characteristic in the characters. I except Charles V, Balthasar and Richard of Trier. And was there ever a time of more robust character traits than the 16th century? To my mind Hütten is, to far too great a degree, merely a represen- tative of 'enthusiasm', which is boring. Wasn't he also witty, an infernal wit, and hence hasn't he been done a grave injustice?

The extent to which even your Sickingen—who, by the way, is portrayed much too abstractly—suffers as a result of a conflict that is quite independent of all his personal calculations is evident from the necessity he is in of urging friendship with the towns, etc., upon his knights and, on the other hand, from the satisfaction with which he himself imposes club-law upon those same towns.

To come down to details, I would censure the sometimes excessive preoccupation of individuals with themselves—the result of your predilection for Schiller. E.g. on p. 121, when Hütten is telling Marie the history of his life, it would have been quite natural to make Marie say:



**[p. 421]**

'The whole gamut of sensations',

etc., up to the words,

'And weighs more heavily on me than did the years'.

The preceding verses, from 'They say' to 'grown older', might follow at this point, but the comment, 'The virgin in a single night matures into a woman' (although showing that the love Marie knows is more than a mere abstraction), is completely pointless; still less should Marie have begun by reflecting upon her own 'ageing'. After recounting all that she had said during the 'one' hour, she might have given general expression to her feelings in the phrase about her "ageing'. Again, what offends me in the lines that follow is: 'I thought it was my right' (i.e. happiness). Why give the lie to the ingenuous view of the world which Marie has hitherto professed to hold, by turning it into a doctrine of rights? Maybe some other time I shall give you my opinion in greater detail.

I consider the scene between Sickingen and Charles V to be particularly felicitous, although the dialogue on both sides is rather too much in the nature of pleading; also the scenes in Trier. Hutten's lines about the sword I thought very fine.

Well, that's enough for this time. You have made my wife into a special admirer of your play. Only Marie doesn't satisfy her.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. There are some bad misprints in Engels' Po and Rhine. I append a list of them on the last page of this letter.3

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassale. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

[^2]: :i The list is in Marx's handwriting.

[^3]: 15*-194





**[p. 241]**

ENGELS TO ELISABETH ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

Manchester, 20 April 1859 Dear Mother,

At last a modicum of peace and quiet in which to write to you again. I got both your dear letters and am glad to hear that you are all well and that the Blank children have recovered from the measles. I am very well; my back teeth are gradually breaking up, but not too painfully on the whole, otherwise there's absolutely nothing wrong with me; my appetite and digestion are first-rate and there hasn't been a trace of the old troubles.

So little Delius has finally been unable after all to help coming the Bradfordian over you. I should have thought he would mind his p's and q's a bit more, but since he has evidently begun to stir up these little troubles, I can only tell you that in Bradford talking big is in the very air, and that, in the long run, it's a sheer impossibility for a Bradfordian to tell the truth. Now that the little chap shares lodgings with Wilhelm Kutter, who is the greatest tall story teller under the sun, he seems increasingly to be acquiring the same virtue. If a Bradfordian were to tell me that twice two makes four, I would immediately begin to doubt the accuracy of the multiplication table. I'm warning you of this in advance, so that you're not too hard on the little chap; Bradfordians are all alike, they're fluent liars. The story about the horse originated simply from my having told the owner that, if he would sell the animal for less than £120, he was to let me know—nothing more. It's a long way from there to buying. Were it now to be offered me at £120, I would think twice before giving £100 for it, since it is in fact rather too light for me and for the same money I could get a very fine, strong hunter. Come to that, it's not such a tall story about his bolting into a shop. Any horse that's really mettlesome and has done little or nothing for a whole week will, with an indifferent rider, engage in all manner of strange antics, and whether the pair of them break their necks is entirely a matter of luck. But no horse is going to find it easy to take me into a shop against my will, you may be sure of that.

The other story, the one about Carl Siebel, is still more of a fabrication. Far from leading a dissipated life, he spends nearly every evening at home, hardly ever goes out and has hardly any



[^1]: 15**



