---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "241. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 20 April "
Page_Range: "459-462"
---

# 241. Engels to Elisabeth Engels. 20 April 

I didn't know that E. Blank was in London and hope that he'll come up here one of these days; anyhow, a few months ago he promised he would. War or no war, by the way, let nothing prevent you from coming over here this summer—I'm counting firmly on it. As you know, we're bound for Scotland this summer, and in the meantime you can take another look at your Walter Scott so that you'll know what's what.

But now I must stop as it's 7 o'clock and I still have sundry business letters to write. I had really meant to enclose a note for Father, but it is absolutely impossible and I must have the statements done for him as well. So I'll write to him as soon as I can, in two or three days' time.

Meanwhile give him my love, and also to my brothers and sisters and their families.

With much love from your son,

Friedrich

You needn't, of course, tell Mrs Siebel every word I've said about Carl.

From the bottom of my heart I wish you many happy returns of the day, and hope that I shall be able to do so many, many times again.

[^1]: First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, 1921

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a at bottom





**[p. 242]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 April 1859

Dear Frederick,

I have MODIFIED your ARTICLE3 to accord with the latest NEWS. You didn't, I suppose, waste your time (as I was obliged to do) wading through last Monday's parliamentary debates.1" Their CIST was as follows:

1. England has been duped throughout the negotiations. 2. England is decidedly pro-Austrian. ad 1. The English ministers had announced once before that everything was SETTLED. This was when the news of the evacuation of Rome °5 was appearing in all the papers. From statements made in the House of Lords it follows: that the Popec really had requested that his territory be evacuated. France had repeatedly complained to the English about the falsity of her position in Rome. She had wished to withdraw but was prevented, on the one hand, by the Pope's apprehensions and, on the other, by the Austrians' refusal similarly to withdraw. This was actually the official PRETEXT Boustrapa40 gave England to justify the scene with the Austrian ambassador on 1 January.406 WELL, the Pope scotched that PRETEXT. Austria ACTUALLY withdrew 2 battalions from Bologna and had given ORDERS for the remaining troops to leave. Then Bonaparte discovered a pretext for not evacuating, and thus the whole business fell through. This put Mr Derby into a very BAD TEMPER and, TO SOOTH HIM, Bonaparte unbosomed himself about the 'ITALIAN QUESTION' to Lord Cowley, who telegraphed London saying he found his demands 'SATISFACTORY'. Thereupon Cowley was sent to Vienna bearing Bonaparte's demands which England had ac- cepted. (This man Cowley is the selfsame swine who, in Vienna in 1848/49, intrigued against the German revolution.) This was at the end of February. Austria, being exceedingly reluctant to engage in a war and having at the time not progressed nearly so far in the matter of armaments as by the middle of March, accepted

[^1]: a 'The State of the Question.—Germany Arming' - lj An account of the debates in the British Parliament on 18 April 1859 was published in The Times, No. 23284, 19 April 1859. - ' Pius IX





**[p. 426]**



