---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "242. Marx to Engels. 22 April "
Page_Range: "462-466"
---

# 242. Marx to Engels. 22 April 

ad 2. Bonaparte could accept these latter proposals since they were detrimental solely to Austria in so far as she was in the lead with her armaments. He had to accept them if Derby was not to be given a pretext for taking an outright stand against him. Austria had to reject them if she was not to deprive herself of every advantage, etc. Bonaparte, who had counted on Derby's fall and Palmerston's accession, was IN A PLIGHT THE WORSE since in their speeches Derby and Disraeli had plainly indicated that they were tired of being duped by Bonaparte and Russia and had, moreover, definitely sided with Austria. Malmesbury said he failed to understand upon what pretext Bonaparte had intervened in the Italian imbroglio. Derby said that England would at first observe ARMED NEUTRALITY, but turn against any power which 'for no good reason' instigated a war. Derby said that England's interests in the Adriatic did not permit him to look on with folded arms; and that he would regard an attack on Trieste almost as a casus belli. Disraeli said that Austria had behaved with DIGNIFIED MODERATION' and that Sardinia was AMBIGUOUS, VEXING AND EVEN AMBITIOUS-. Finally they all said that the treaties of 1815 must be MAINTAINED, and repeatedly emphasised, with immediate reference to the TERRITORIAL SETTLEMENT

This much is certain: T h e ruse whereby Derby, instead of resigning, consigned Parliament to the devil, thus temporarily banishing Palmerston into private life, has placed the Russo- French game in a serious dilemma.

T h e r e are only two alternatives. Either Austria allows herself to be intimidated by minatory TELEGRAMS from London and Berlin, and WITHDRAWS Gyulay's ultimatum to Piedmont,408 in which case not even God will be able to help Bonaparte. For then he will, IN FACT, be compelled to disarm and be treated by the army as a Soulouque. As it is, the workers in Paris have been infuriated by the turpitude of Blanqui's deportation to Cayenne.409 O r else Austria wearies of diplomatic trifling and marches on Turin. In which case Mr Bonaparte has won a diplomatic victory in as much as Austria will

[^1]: IN ITALY, that those treaties INTENDED PUTTING A CHECK UPON THE

[^2]: ENCROACHING AMBITION OF FRANCE'.





**[p. 428]**

I'll send you the Tribunes tomorrow. Apropos. T h e great imperial Vogt 4 1 0 has written Freiligrath an epistle in which he informs him that this imperial gang is bringing out a new newspaper in Zurich (or Berne, I forget which). 4" He invited Freiligrath to write for the feuilleton and to enlist the profound Bûcher as political correspondent.

T h e platform upon which imperial Vogt proposes to build a new 'party' and which has, as he himself puts it, been most warmly welcomed by A. Herzen, is this: Germany surrenders her extrater- ritorial possessions. Does not support Austria. French despotism is transitory, Austrian permanent. Both despots to be allowed to bleed to death. (Even some predilection for Bonaparte in evidence.) Armed neutrality for Germany. A revolutionary move- ment in Germany, as Vogt 'knows on the best authority', is not to be thought of DURING OUR LIFETIME. CONSEQUENTLY, as soon as Austria has been ruined by Bonaparte, the fatherland will experience the spontaneous beginnings of a moderate, liberal-national develop- ment à la imperial Regency, and Vogt may yet become Prussian court jester. From Vogt's letter it is evident that he believes Freiligrath to be no longer connected with us in any way. T h e ignorance of this imperial Vogt about the people he is dealing with! Bûcher, as an Urquhartite, is an Austrian. T h e great Blind, ON THE OTHER HAND, finding himself in the dilemma of being anti-Bonaparte as a German and anti-Austria as VRotteck, is AT THE PRESENT MOMENT convening a 'German Parliament', 3 as the telegraph will soon announce in Manchester.412

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: 3 K. Blind, 'Der Befreier Napoleon', Hermann, No. 15, 16 April 1859.





**[p. 243]**

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE82

IN BERLIN

London, 5 May 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

From the enclosed letter dated April 12,a which I should like to have back, you will see that there is a very considerable difference between the terms offered me by your cousin Friedländer and the terms you originally communicated to me.b Nevertheless I replied by return accepting them.413 I merely noted:

1. that I could not make disbursements for telegrams, a point, by the by, that hardly needed mentioning and had been anticipated in your letter;

2. that, if we came to an arrangement, I should like (though I did not make it a conditio sine qua') to be able to draw on them with a BANKER here for articles, etc., sent, as is done in the case of the Tribune.

So far there has been no answer, which I find strange. If the editors have changed their minds, they might have had the decency to inform me. As you are aware, I did not in any way thrust myself forward in this matter. But, having accepted, I made one or two preliminary approaches to English newspapers, etc., and I am specially anxious not to be compromised in the eyes of these people and other acquaintances whom I have informed of the matter for business reasons. That I, for my part, have not yet sent off any article is only natural, since there is still no firm engagement.

The elections here have not, alas, turned out to be sufficiently Tory.885 Had this been the case there would, BY and BY, have been the beginnings of a revolutionary movement here. Palmerston's return to the FOREIGN MINISTRY can now, AFTER SOME SHUFFLING, be

[^1]: a A letter from M. Friedländer inviting Marx to contribute to the Vienna newspaper Die Presse. - h See this volume, pp. 408-09. - l necessary condition





**[p. 430]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin, 1922

244

MARX TO ENGELS20

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 May 1859

DEAR Frederick,

Your article received.414 You will have seen from a telegraphic despatch that Hess has come out against Gyulay's plan (perhaps one should describe it as absence of plan). Looked at from our—i.e. a revolutionary—POINT OF VIEW, it would be by no means undesirable if Austria were to begin either by suffering a reverse or, which is morally the same thing, by withdrawing into Lombardy again. This will greatly complicate matters and thus allow sufficient time for things to come to a head in Paris. All in all the state of affairs is such that, no matter on what side BLUNDERS occur, they will necessarily redound to our advantage. If, at the outset, Austria were to beat the Piedmontese army, take Turin and thrash the French as they debouched from the Alps, Russia might immediate- ly turn against Bonaparte415—having in any case not yet actually entered into any obligations against Germany, and our rotten Prussian government would be extricated from the only dilemma that might cost it its neck. Again: Such a devastating defeat at the very beginning could bring about a mutiny in the French army and an anti-Bonaparte revolution in Paris. What then? At this juncture the upshot would be victorious armed intervention by the Holy Alliance lfi against a potential revolutionary government in Paris, something which certainly doesn't come into our calcul3

[^1]: a calculations



