---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "243. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 5 May "
Page_Range: "466-467"
---

# 243. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 5 May 



**[p. 431]**

It was wrong of you not to have sent us at least two more pamphlets a—for Pfänder, who sent off your manuscript under his own name, and for Freiligrath. It would also be fitting to send a copy to P. Imandt (DUNDEE SEMINARY, Dundee). You must pay some heed to party relations and keep the chaps in good humour.

Apropos, I deleted the whole of the preamble to your last Friday's article,b firstly because I had my MISGIVINGS about the Austrians; secondly because it is absolutely essential that we do not identify our cause with that of the present German governments.

In my view, the worthy Palmerston will very shortly be back at the helm as FOREIGN MINISTER or War Minister. Those dolts of Tories are indeed making things too easy for him. First they go and spoil the Austrians' game by their miserable SHOW OF MEDIATION. Then, as soon as the Franco-Russian treaty has been made known, they bend every FORCE to deny its existence, so as to prove THAT THEY HAVE NOT BEEN TAKEN BY SURPRISE. This in turn gives The Times the opportunity to deride them and adopt a patriotic attitude towards Russia.' But the LONG AND SHORT of it is that The Times, like all the rest of Palmerston's papers (though these, depending on their allotted role, either oppose or support the various powers involved), is hinting at the necessity of reappointing THE TRULY BRITISH MINISTER141 (The Morning Advertiser and The Daily Telegraph, which write for the MOB, are saying it openly). The wretched Tories ought instead to have 'lent credence to' the Russo-French treaty and seized on the chance of going for Pam. They had the best of OPPORTUNITIES. Firstly, Pam was in Compiegne3"' when the whole plan was hatched. Secondly, Mr Whiteside, speaking on behalf of the ministry, had in fact already told silly old John Bull'1 what had long been apparent from the Blue Books,38 namely that in 1848 Austria approached Palmerston and offered to relinquish the whole of Lombardy but to install an Italian government in Venice under an Austrian ARCHDUKE, if he would mediate.c Piedmont had approached him at the same time, France ditto. What did Pam do?

[^1]: 11 F. Engels, Po and Phine. - h 'Prospects of the War' - ' 'In our long list of telegrams', The Times, No. 23295, 2 May 1859. - d A reference to J. Whiteside's speech in the House of Commons delivered on 25 March 1859, The Times, No. 23264, 26 March 1859. - c Marx refers to the Blue Book Correspondence Respecting the Affairs of Italy published in 1849.



