---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "244. Marx to Engels. 6 May "
Page_Range: "467-470"
---

# 244. Marx to Engels. 6 May 



**[p. 432]**

Ad vocem BUSINESS.11 That ass Friedländer wrote to me on 12 April but had forgotten the crucial point, i.e. instructions to a banking-house. Instead, he spoke of an 'advance'. This last is NONSENSE. £8-10, and often £15, will be needed each week for telegrams. I wrote and told the ass so. Up till now no answer, although he regularly sends me the Vienna Presse (from which I gather that it now has 26,000 subscribers). Yesterday I wrote Lassalle a fulminating letter.' I see from,the Presse that Lassalle has embarked on his articles and telegraphic despatches for that paper with great zeal albeit small talent. However he did not accept this post until I had 'given him permission' in writing,'1 not wanting—or so he says—to take the political risk without my CONSENT. It would be a rum business, would it not, if all the transaction led to was Lassalle's installing himself in that quarter? It's possible, however, that the delay is due to Friedländer's difficulty in arranging the financial side in Vienna during the present TROUBLES. MEANWHILE, out of impatience, I am devoting myself to algebra.

Salut. Is Lupus in Manchester?

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: 11 F. Wurm, Diplomatische Geschichte der Orientalischen Frage. - '' See this volume, p. 416. - '•• Ibid., p. 409. - '< Ibid., pp. 429-30.

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time





**[p. 245]**

MARX TO MAX FRIEDLÄNDER

IN VIENNA

London, 16 May 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Sir,

I have been receiving the Vienna Presse regularly and my debt to you for sending it is the greater in that it throws light on conditions in Austria at this important juncture.

I have not yet had a reply to the letter I wrote you some weeks ago.4ls If, by chance, the proposed arrangement11 has come to nothing as a result of the DÉRANGEMENTS of the Vienna money market,4'7 / would beg you to advise me of this by return, for I have made certain agreements regarding telegrams with newspapers over here which commit me to financial outlays and which I shall accordingly terminate forthwith.

Yours very truly,

Dr K. Marx

246

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 16 May 1859

Dear Engels,

From the enclosed letter of Lassalle's,418 which I must have back by return, you will see how far things have progressed with the

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow, 1962 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Marx's work for the Vienna newspaper Die Presse (see this volume, p. 432).





**[p. 434]**

More in my next—highly comical, too. This much today: our c

ex-gérantd Korff has been sentenced in New Orleans to 12 years penal servitude for FORGERY OF A BILL.

Ex-imperial regent Vogt 4 1 0 has sold himself to Bonaparte. 4 2 0

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, " n e

247

MARX T O E N G E L S '

[London,] 18 May 1859

Dear Engels,

Lassalle's letter418 contains several POINTS upon which I shall haul him over the coals. D'abord? the laddie talks about what he 'is to do for me'. But all I asked of him was that he, who set the whole thing in train and whose articles I was constantly seeing in the

Presse, should enlighten me as to the mysterious silence from Vienna.' This was his BUSINESS. Secondly, he makes it look as

[^1]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 407-09. - b We shall see. - ' A reference to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. - d ex-manager - e First - f See this volume, p. 429.



