---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "246. Marx to Engels. 16May "
Page_Range: "470-471"
---

# 246. Marx to Engels. 16May 



**[p. 435]**

Presse is edited cleverly and fairly, with far greater tact than Lassalle would be able to command. Finally, I did not invite the laddie's instructions as to what is or is not 'worthy' of me. I consider it RATHER ARROGANT of him to drop hints to me on the subject. If Friedländer manages to SETTLE the financial side, I shall

positivement stand by my decision, which is in no way altered by the fact that Lassalle's articles don't seem to suit Friedländer. From recent issues of the Presse I see that the number of its subscribers has risen to 27,000.

Lassalle's pamphlet" is an ENORMOUS BLUNDER.421 The publication of your 'anonymous' pamphlet made him envious. Admittedly the position of the revolutionary party in Germany is difficult at present, yet a little critical analysis of the CIRCUMSTANCES suffices to make it plain. As regards the 'governments', it is clear from all points of view, if only in the interests of Germany's existence, that they must be urged not to remain neutral but to be, as you rightly say, patriotic. But the affair can be given revolutionary pertinence simply by stressing opposition to Russia more strongly than opposition to Boustrapa. ° That's what Lassalle should have done vis-à-vis the Neue Preussische Zeitungs anti-French clamour. Indeed, il is this point which, as the war goes on, will in practice involve the German governments in high treason and at which it will be possible lo seize them by the throat. Incidentally, if Lassalle takes it upon himself to speak in the name of the party, he must in future either resign himself to being publicly disavowed by us, since circumstances are too grave to take account of feelings, or else he must first ascertain the views held by others besides himself before following

[^1]: Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens - h Po and Rhine



