---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "247. Marx to Engels. 18 May "
Page_Range: "471-478"
---

# 247. Marx to Engels. 18 May 



**[p. 436]**

The confusion presently reigning in men's minds has reached a curious peak. D'abord, THERE IS that traitor to the Empire, the 'imperial regent',410 who has received cash payments from Paris.42" In the Hamburg Freischütz, Mr Meyen praises Vogt's piece.3 There is a type of vulgar democrat (some sincere ones among them believe that an Austrian defeat, complemented by revolution in Hungary+Galicia, etc., would bring about revolution in Germany. The dolts forget that revolution in Germany ncw=disorganisation of her armies and would benefit, not the revolutionaries, but Russia and Boustrapa), a type, I say, of vulgar democrat who de- lights in being able to pipe the same tune as the decembristising'38

Hungarians (Bangyas all) and Poles (in the Prussian chamber a few days ago Mr Cieszkowski called Nicholas the Poles' 'great Slav ally') and Italians. Another lot—e.g. Blind who seeks to combine patriotism and democratism — are making asses of themselves (and old Uhland too among their number) by demanding war with Austria against Bonaparte and, at the same time, an imperial parliament. D'abord, the asses fail to see that the conditions for the fulfilment of this repellent wish are entirely wanting. Secondly, however, they pay so little heed to what is really happening as to be wholly unaware that, in the only part of Germany which counts, namely Prussia, the bourgeois are proud of their Cham- bers, whose power is bound to grow with the growing embarrass- ment of the GOVERNMENT; that these bourgeois are justifiably (as recent transactions in the Chambers go to show) disinclined to be dictated to by Badeners and Württembergers under the style of 'parliament', just as the Prussian government is reluctant to be ruled by Austria under the style of 'Federal Diet'423; that these bourgeois know from the experience of 1848 that a parliament alongside their Chambers destroys the power of the latter while itself remaining nothing more than a phantasm. In fact there is much more revolutionary purchase in the Prussian Chambers, which have to vote budgets and which, in certain EVENTUALITIES, have part of the ARMY and the Berlin mob behind them, than in a DEBATING CLUB under the style of 'Imperial Parliament'. That Badeners, Württembergers and OTHER SMALL DEER take a different

[^1]: •' E. Meyen's review of K. Vogt's book Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas was published anonymously under the title 'Oesterreich und Deutschland' in Der Freischütz, Nos. 55 and 56, 7 and HI May 1859.



From these GENERAL THINGS I NOW come to the STATE OF PARTIES (German) in London, and here I must recapitulate certain matters which I considered too boring to recount to you so long as they were still in progress.

First, you will recall that Mr Liebknecht introduced the CLOWN E. Bauer into the so-called Communist Society4"6 just when I had publicly broken with Bauer and that the CLOWN took over the Neue Zeit in which the ignorant blockhead, by his EXAGGERATION of the few communist catch-phrases he had picked up from Scherzer, turned our party into a laughing-stock. For me it was a most disagreeable affair—not because of the few louts in London, but because of the malicious glee of the democratic crew, because of the FALSE APPEARANCES evoked by smartly sending COPIES of the filthy rag to Germany and the UNI LED SLATES, because of the knowledge the CLOWN gained of the rotten state of the party; finally, because of the contacts he made with the International Committee here.427

Throughout the time the CLOWN was editing the Neue Zeit and lecturing to the Society, Mr Liebknecht remained in the latter and, moreover, talked a great deal of nonsense about having to defend me against the great odium felt for me by the workers (i.e. louts), etc. Well, after only half a number (I sent it to you) of the Neue Zeit had appeared because of lack of money, Liebknecht acted as CHAIRMAN at a meeting to which the various associations had been invited for the purpose of saving the paper.428 The result, of course, was nil. After this performance, I convened our people (a small gang, Pfänder, Lochner, etc., and a few newcomers, whom

[^1]: The question of Marx's contributing to the Vienna newspaper Die Presse.





**[p. 438]**

Mr CLOWN had finally written to Biskamp (you have a letter to him from Biskamp) saying that Kinkel had ruined the Neue Zeit by his intrigues, appeared to be seething with vindictive feelings, etc. WEIL. Biskamp comes up to London and is d'abord STARTLED BY THE FACT that one of his own articles intended for the Neue Zeit has appeared in the Hermann somewhat watered down. He hurries to the cipw N, who seems far from PLEASED to see him, says he is ill, simulates disillusionment and ends up by telling him that the whole thing is a mess, that he (Biskamp) should not get involved in it, that Kinkel is too strong, etc. But Biskamp, struck by the fact that Kinkel had transferred his Hermann to the Neue Zeit's press, having given up his former press, and that he was printing his manuscripts, hastily sought out Hirschfeld at the press where he discovered — Edgar Bauer's manuscript and proof corrections. IN ONE WORD, Mr Edgar had used the Neue Zeit to sell himself to Kinkel and—evidence of the man's fecundity—made the most of the occasion by printing Biskamp's manuscripts as contributions of his own. That oaf Kinkel! He seeks to ruin the Neue Zeit, not by giving the CLOWN money and allowing him to continue as editor, but by buying the said CLOWN who, throughout his editorship, had eschewed all polemic! But in this way Gottfried thought to rid himself once and for all of competition, however small. One more word about the activities of this same Gottfried. A third German paper made its appearance here, first under the title Londoner Deutsche Zeitung, then under the title Germania. This paper, edited by a certain Ermani, had Austrian leanings. Gottfried revealed that the editor had committed some felony, got Dr Juch to threaten him, bought up his paper and press for a mere song (whether out of the Revolutionary Fund or with money supplied by the Prussian Embassy isn't known) and, they say, intends to continue publishing the sheet under Juch's management and a different title. Kinkel's paper has 1,700 subscribers, is coming to be a source of income, and the fellow wishes to secure it against any competition or polemics.



**[p. 1859]**

I told him that we could not contribute directly to a small paper nor, for that matter, to any party paper which we did not ourselves edit However, the latter was a move for which every prerequisite was lacking at the moment. On the other hand Mr Liebknecht might give Biskamp the benefit of his collaboration. I appreciated, of course, that Gottfried has not been left in command of the field and that his dirty schemes should be BAFFLED, but all I would undertake to do was to let them have from time to time 'published' Tribune ARTICLES which they could use; to urge my acquaintances to take the paper; and, finally, to give them verbally any information that reached me and 'pointers' about this and that. On the other hand I stipulated that Biskamp should forthwith publish (he will do so in the very next number) a documented account of Bauer's and Kinkel's dirty work.3 (I shall thus have killed 2 birds with one stone, even if the little paper ceases publication.) Further, that the CLOWN'S objective heights must be abandoned and that the tone adopted must IN EVERY RESPECT be aggressive and polemical and, indeed, as amusing as possible.

CONSEQUENTLY, I would ask you, Lupus, Gumpert and anyone else you can get hold of (point out that our only interest in the thing is that it's anti-Kinkel) to subscribe to Das Volk, OFFICE: 3 Litchfield Street, Soho. (Quarterly subscription 3/6d post free.) Gumpert and Biskamp both come from Hesse-Cassel and since the former may have an occasional bon mot up his sleeve, he might send it to his compatriot. Finally, let me have the name of some fellow (a STATIONER) in Manchester to whom Das Volk could be sent for distribution. (Write to the Bradfordian'1 as well.)

I consider Das Volk to be a dilettante rag like our Brussels and Paris papers.' But covertly and without intervening directly, we can use it to worry the life out of Gottfried, etc., etc. Again, the moment may come, and that very soon, when it will be of crucial importance that, not just our enemies, but we ourselves should be able to publish our views in a London paper. Biskamp works for nothing and hence is all the more deserving of support.

What is really choice is that in No. 18 of the Hermann, the CLOWN wrote a highly inane, piddling sort of article in which he 'proves' that, because of 'England's neutrality', the present war is con-

[^1]: •' An item on the subject appeared in Das Volk, No. 4. 28 May ('Vereins-Na(hriihten'). - '» Wilhelm Strohn - ' the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung and

[^2]: Vorwärts!





**[p. 14]**

If you haven't any Po and Rhine left, you must order some. COPIES are also needed for Steffen, Weydemeyer and several reviews here.

Might it be possible to send poor Eccarius, who is again going to pieces in his sweat-shop, a fresh consignment of port?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Have received a letter from Weydemeyer and Komp.432 Shall send it you very soon. Thanks to them Duncker has already had orders for about 100 copies of my Economy'1 from the UNITED STATES.

[^2]: Tell Lupus that, FROM THE BEGINNING, Beta (Bettziech), editor of How do you do?, was also Gottfried's real editorial factotum.

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1930 f l r s t t I m e

[^4]: *• [E. Bauer,] 'Englische Neutralität', Hermann, No. 18, 7 May 1859. - h K. Blind, 'Der lokalisierte Krieg und die deutsche Volkspartei' and L. B[ucher], Louis Napoleon's Laufbahn', Hermann, No. 19, May 1859. - c Albert August Anders - d K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.





**[p. 248]**

ENGELS TO FERDINAND LASSALLE433

IN BERLIN

Manchester, 18 May 1859 6 Thorncliffe Grove

Dear Lassalle,

You will have found it somewhat strange that I haven't written to you for so long, the more so since I owe you an opinion on your Sickingen." But that is precisely what has kept me from writing to you for so long. With the current and universal barrenness of fiction I seldom have a chance to read such a work, and for years I have never had a chance to read one of this kind in such a way that the reading of it resulted in a detailed judgment, a precisely stated opinion. The rubbish isn't worth the trouble. Even the few better English novels I read from time to time, e. g. those of Thackeray, have never been able to elicit this interest in me, despite their undeniable literary and cultural significance. But, having lain fallow for so long, my judgment has lost most of its edge and I need a good deal of time before I can permit myself to express an opinion. Your Sickingen, however, deserves better treatment than that sort of stuff and so I've taken my time. The first and second readings of what is in every sense, both as regards material and treatment, a German national drama, stirred my emotions to the extent that I was compelled to put it aside for a while, the more so as my taste has become so vitiated in these lean times that it has reduced me, I'm ashamed to say, to a state in which sometimes even stuff of inferior quality inevitably has some effect on me at the first reading. So in order to be wholly unbiassed, wholly 'critical', I put Sickingen away, i. e. allowed a few of my acquaintances to borrow it (there are still a few Germans here who are more or less knowledgeable about literature). Habent sua fata libellih—if they're borrowed one rarely sets eyes on them again, and so I actually had to recover my Sickingen by force. I can tell you that, after the third and fourth readings, my impression has remained unaltered and, in the knowledge that your Sickingen can stand up to criticism, I shall now speak my mind.

[^1]: a F. Lassalle, Franz von Sickingen. - b Books have their destinies—from Terentianus Maurus, De litteris, syllabis et metris ('Carmen heroicum', 258).





**[p. 442]**



