---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "248. Engels to Ferdinand Lassalle. 18 May "
Page_Range: "478-483"
---

# 248. Engels to Ferdinand Lassalle. 18 May 



**[p. 443]**

Now, as regards the historical content, you have presented what to you were the two most important aspects of the movement of lhat period very vividly and with justifiable reference to subse- quent developments: the national aristocratic movement rep- resented by Sickingen, and the humanist-theoretical movement, with its more extensive ramifications in the theological and ecclesiastical field, the Reformation. The scenes I like best are those between Sickingen and the Emperor3 and between the Legate and the Archbishop of Trier (here, in the contrast between the narrow-minded German prince of the church and the worldly Legate with his aesthetic and classical culture and political and theoretical foresight, you have, too, pulled off a nice piece of individual characterisation which nevertheless stems directly from the representative character of the two protagonists); in the scene between Sickingen and Charles the characterisation is also very striking. However, in making Hütten tell his life-story,c the content of which you rightly describe as essential, you have chosen a desperate means of introducing that content into the play. Also of great importance is the conversation in Act V between Balthasar and Franz during which the former remonstrates with his master about the genuinely revolutionary policy he should have followed. It is here that the real tragedy becomes apparent; and, precisely

[^1]: •' Charles V - '' Richard von Greifenklau - ' a scene between Hütten and Maria in Act III





**[p. 444]**

The attitude of the towns and the princes at that time is likewise portrayed more than once with great clarity, thereby pretty well exhausting what might be called the official elements of the movement as it then was. But something upon which I should say you had failed to lay due emphasis are the non-official, plebeian and peasant elements, with their concomitant theoretical represen- tation. In its own way the peasant movement was just as national, just as hostile to the princes, as that of the aristocracy, and the colossal dimensions of the struggle in which it succumbed contrast most significantly with the levity with which the aristocracy, leaving Sickingen in the lurch, gave itself up to its historical calling of sycophancy. Even allowing for your concept of the drama which, as you will have seen, is rather too abstract, not realistic enough, in my opinion, I should say that the peasant movement deserved closer attention; certainly, the peasant scene with Joss Fritz is true to type and the individuality of this 'agitator'437 is very accurately portrayed but, relative to the aristocratic movement, it does not represent with sufficient force what was then already a surging torrent of peasant agitation. In accordance with my view of the drama, which consists in not allowing the ideal to oust the real, or Schiller to oust Shakespeare, the introduction of society's plebei- an section, so wonderfully colourful at the time, would have provided material of a quite different kind with which to animate the play, an incomparable backdrop for the national aristocratic movement going on down-stage, which would itself thus appear in its true light for the first time. What bizarre portraits does this period of dissolving feudal ties not bring forth! Vagabond beggar kings, hungry mercenaries and adventurers of all kinds—a Falstaffian3 backdrop which, in a historical play in this sense, must needs be even more effective than in Shakespeare! But apart from that, I should say more particularly that neglect of the peasant movement is what has led you to give an incorrect idea, or so it seems to me, of one aspect of the national aristocratic movement also, while at the same time allowing the truly tragic element in Sickingen's fate to escape you. In my view, it never occurred to the bulk of the nobility then subject direcdy to the emperor to form an alliance with the peasants; their dependence on the income deriving from oppression of the peasants did not admit of this. An

[^1]: a Falstaff is a character in Shakespeare's Henry IV and The Merry Wives of Windsor.





**[p. 445]**

As you can see, I am judging your work by a very high standard, indeed the highest there is, from both the aesthetic and the historical point of view, and the fact that I have to do so in

[^1]: Richard von Greifenklau





**[p. 446]**

In other respects it would seem that world events are about to take a truly delectable course. It would be difficult to imagine a better basis for a thorough-going German revolution than that provided by a Franco-Russian-alliance. The water has to be right up to our necks before we Germans are gripped en masse by the furor teutonicus"; and this time we would seem to be in sufficient danger of drowning. Tant mieux.b In such a crisis all existing powers must necessarily be ruined and all the parties crumble one after another, from the Kreuz-Zeitung to Gottfried Kinkel, and from Count Rechberg to 'Hecker, Struve, Blenker, Zitz and Blum'439; in such a struggle the moment must necessarily come when only the most ruthless and resolute party is in a position to save the nation and, at the same time, the conditions be given which alone make it possible to jettison completely all the old trumpery—internal dissension on the one hand and, on the other, the Polish and Italian appendages which are the legacy of Austria. We must not cede an inch of Prussian Poland and what'

249

MARX TO FRANZ DUNCKER

London, 21 May 11859]

Dear Sir,

[^1]: First published in Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 1. Printed according to the original Nr. 18, 1922

[^2]: Published in English in full for the

[^3]: first time

[^4]: IN BERLIN

[^5]: From a communication I have received from North America432

[^6]: I see that about 100 copies of the first instalment11 have been ordered

[^7]: ;l From Lucan's Pharsalia, I, 255. - b So much the better. - ' End of letter missing. - d K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.





**[p. 447]**

The slowness with which the matter is being handled would not appear to be in your own interest. It is certainly not in mine.

In the list of printer's errors for the sheets I have had I would request you to include the following: :l

First published in International Review of Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. X, Part 1, 1965

Published in English for the first time

250

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 23 May 1859

Dear Moor,

I entirely agree about the manifesto.11 What ought we to do about printing it? It will probably have to be printed in London; make some inquiries about costs and other PARTICULARS SO that we can launch it immediately it's been written.425

The Völkchen' business is very amusing, very satisfactory, and may turn out to be extremely useful.430 As regards its distribution here, the following should be noted: While I could easily find an English 'STATIONER', he would never stand a chance of catching even a STRAY subscriber. To get hold of them we must have recourse to the FOREIGN BOOKSELLERS here, Dunnill and Palmer, Princess Street, and Franz Thimm, Princess Street. Lupus is taking out a subscription with Dunnill and Palmer, Gumpert and I with Thimm, who is our bookseller. The Hermann is very much on the wane here and there is a whole load of back-numbers; Thimm's manager, who doesn't seem overfond of Kinkel, tells me that the

[^1]: u The end of the letter is missing. - '' See this volume, p. 437. - ' diminutive of Volk



