---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "249. Marx to Franz Duncker. 21 May "
Page_Range: "483-484"
---

# 249. Marx to Franz Duncker. 21 May 



**[p. 448]**

I shall deal with the battle of Casteggio next Friday; the affair is too insignificant to warrant 2 articles and the telegrams are too vague to permit of anything worthwhile being said about it.1' Your old map of Lombardy has stood me in very good stead, the scale being approx. 1/160,000, hence quite large. Unfortunately the delineation of the ground is very poor.

Many regards,

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 19°°- Published in English for the first time

251

[London,] 24 May 1859

Dear Engels,

If you could possibly let me have some 'TIN', you would greatly oblige me. That wretched Duncker, whom I had been counting on, appears to be putting the thing0 off ad infinitum. Once again 11 days have gone by without my receiving anything from the dolt. Who do you think it is STOPS MY WAY? None other than Lassalle. First,

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS20

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: 11 See this volume, p. 439. - b The New-York Daily Tribune published two articles by Engels on the battle of Casteggio (or Montebello) fought by the French and Austrians on 20 May 1859: 'Fighting at Last' and 'The Battle of Montebello'. They may have been two instalments of what was originally one article. - ' Marx's A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



