---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "250. Engels to Marx. 23 May "
Page_Range: "484-485"
---

# 250. Engels to Marx. 23 May 



**[p. 449]**

I have seen to your orders for Manchester. If you can possibly find the time tomorrow, write 20-30-40 lines for me in German on the subject of the war; I shall pass them on to Dishrag Liebknecht, not in your writing but by dictating them. There is no time to be lost since the Volk boasts only one type-setter and everything has to be ready by the morning of each Friday.

A point not to be overlooked. With something more original from the theatre of war we ought TO CATCH at least 50 more customers in London.' I shall MANAGE the thing in such a way that initially you and I are not directly responsible.

You will be able to judge Gottfried's'' manoeuvres from the fact that last week in the East End the parson was selling his Hermann to the Whitechapel322 public for a HALFPENNY, solely in order to stop the sale of the Volk. But where did the fonds' come from? Schapper tells me that Willich has been over here. In which case the fellows must have shared out the money and flung the small change to watchdog Heinzen, for the dog has ceased to bark. We shall get to the bottom of it.

As regards the business of publishing our manifesto' I SHALL LOOK

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Imandt is marrying his landlady's daughter, a Scotswoman. A nice district, too.R

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, , , , • • „ • • , . r „ r • Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. f l r s t t l m e

[^3]: XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^4]: a Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens - b Po and Rhine - c Engels wrote an article entided 'The Campaign in Italy' for the Volk. - d Gottfried Kinkel's - e funds - f See this volume, p. 437. - s An allusion to a joke current at the time: one woman tells another of her son's death in action near Leipzig (1813), whereupon the other remarks: 'And a nice district, too!' ('Auch eine schöne Gegend!')



