---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "251. Marx to Engels. 24 May "
Page_Range: "485-487"
---

# 251. Marx to Engels. 24 May 



**[p. 252]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 May 1859

Dear Fred,

As things stand here just now, it's doubtful whether I shall be able to leave London, certainly not at the beginning of next week.

It is now a whole fortnight, or so I see from a note in my DIARY, since I sent that scoundrel Duncker the last 3 proof-sheets (i. e. sheets 9-11). The thing3 was ready, therefore, and all the chap had to do was send me the clean proofs of the last 3 sheets for the list of misprints. Instead of that, what do I get? Lassalle's pamphletb and, as we hadn't any money in the house and pretty well everything has been pawned that can be pawned, I had to send my last wearable coat to the pawnshop since there was 2/- to pay on this rubbish, which might perhaps cost 8d in Berlin. But to come to the point:

It is now KVIDENT, then, that a further fortnight's embargo has been placed on my thing in order to make way for Mr Lassalle. The work still to be done on it would take 3 hours at the most. But that infernal and conceited fool has decreed the embargo in order to secure the undivided attention publici.c Duncker, the swine, is happy as a sandboy, however, since it gives him a further excuse to postpone payment of my fee. I shan't forget the trick the little Jew has played. The speed with which his tripe was printed shows that he was magna parsd responsible for our stuff being delayed. Besides the oaf is so enamoured of his laborious emanations that he takes it for granted that I'm burning with impatience to see his 'anonymous' pamphlet and am 'objective' enough to take the killing of my stuff as a matter of course.

The confounded Jew in Viennae hasn't written either. Lupus is greatly mistaken about Liebknecht if he imagines that this worthy citizen could himself have composed a piece such as 'Der Reichsregent'.4"1 Biskamp wrote itf (I gave him the FACTS) and it must be Biskamp that writes everything. Nothing is attributable to Liebknecht save the 'Politische Rundschau', dated London with the

[^1]: a K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - '' Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens - «' of the public - (l in large measure - e Max. Frieden- der - f [E. Biskamp,] 'Der Reichsregent-, Das Volk. No. 2, 14 May 1859.





**[p. 451]**

Even if my private circumstances—apart from waiting for Duncker—were not likely to preclude my coming u p to Manches- ter next week, there would be the further consideration that, were I to abandon my post, everything might easily go to rack and ruin in view of the vast intrigues being conjured u p here, there, and everywhere by the emigre democrats, the merchants of Camber- well, the Weitlingians, etc., etc., and in view of the extraordinary feebleness of the people who are supposed to represent us here. Yesterday, by the by, I got Pfänder to give categoric instructions to that inert hunk of flesh, Schapper, to the effect that if he did not rejoin the Workers' Society (the so-called communist one) 3" forthwith and take over the MANAGEMENT thereof, I would sever all 'connections' with him. This is the one sphere in which we could make use of the hippopotamus, yet the fool thinks it beneath him. Mais nous verrons}' Never have we had a poorer STAFF. Pieper would have been very useful just now, instead of which he is in Bremen and doesn't even write.

Salut. Your

K. M.

253

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 27 May [1859] Dear Engels,

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels. Printed according lo the original Works, First Russian Edition. Vol. XXII. , , ,. , , . „ ,• , , . , iiitio Published in tninish tor the hist Moscow. 1929 " l i m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: £ 5 received. You must COLOUR YOUR WAR-ARTICLES A i.i TTi.E MORE seeing that you are writing for A GENERAL NEWSPAPER, not for a scientific military journal.

[^4]: •i Das Volk, No. 3, 21 May 1859. - b But we shall see.



