---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "253. Marx to Engels. 27 May "
Page_Range: "488-490"
---

# 253. Marx to Engels. 27 May 



**[p. 254]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 28 May [1859]

Dear Engels,

Herewith a letter I have received from Dana. What should I answer?

Apropos. I have just learned from Biskamp, on the authority of the CLOWN3 himself, that Bruno Bauer was definitely in the pay of Russia. He received 300 friedrichsdors from von Budberg, the Russian ambassador. T h e CLOWN was brought in as accomplice. Bruno dropped the thing because Budberg didn't treat him 'respectfully' and left him to chambrer0 in the antichambre. He came to England for the purpose of attempting, with his brother—par

nobile fratrumc—a similar transaction with the English government. Fell through, OF COURSE. WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THIS?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

255

MARX T O FRANZ DUNCKER

London, 28 May 1859

Dear Sir,

You have not thought fit to reply to the letter in which I requested you to advise me of the price of the book.d Since the American mail leaves only twice a week, I have thus been

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 2913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN BERLIN

[^3]: a Edgar Bauer - b cool down - c a noble pair of brothers (Horace, Satires, II, III, 243) - d K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (see this volume, p. 447).





**[p. 454]**

After your receipt of my manuscript a fortnight elapsed before I got any acknowledgment. In it you said that printing was to commence a week later. That week turned into more than three weeks. About eight weeks ago Lassalle wrote to say that the thing would be finished by the middle of May. More than three weeks ago I received the last three proof-sheets. The amendments that were called for could easily have been made in a single day. Instead, work would again seem to have been completely suspended during that time, although printing was complete. I hereby declare that I am tired of this systematic and deliberate procrastination and that I hereby demand, and indeed categorically, that you desist from these machinations, the purpose of which seems to me exceedingly suspect. All my acquaintances in England are of the same opinion and have earnestly enjoined me to take the above step.

Yours faithfully,

Dr K. Marx

First published in International Review of Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. X, Part 1, 1965 , . „ Published in English for the first time

256

MARX TO FRANZ DUNCKER

[London,] 30 May 1859 Dear Sir,

I can find no misprint in the sheets sent to me." I am sending you the enclosed envelope so that you may, if you deem it worth while, have the postage refunded by the Prussian post. I paid 4/-and some d for this parcel and 21-, etc., for the last but one. The envelope of the latter is in the hands of the English postal authorities, who declare that all such items, even if stamped, must be paid extra unless sent via Calais.

Yours faithfully,

Dr K. Marx

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first time a The proofs of Marx's A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.



