---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "255. Marx to Franz Duncker. 28 May "
Page_Range: "490-491"
---

# 255. Marx to Franz Duncker. 28 May 



**[p. 257]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 June 1859 Dear Engels,

Enclosed 1 copy of the Presse containing some particulars that may be of interest to you. No answer from that fellow, Friedländer,254 needless to say. However, my present explanation for this is as follows: When he lectured Friedländer about bias,a

Lassalle did so, OF COURSE, not only in his but also in my name. Friedländer believes that I am hand in glove with Heraclitus the Dark Philosopher.b So he naturally can't imagine that under PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES I can write for a Viennese, paper. Every day the Vienna Presse contains veiled attacks upon the Berlin wiseacre. Thus, for instance, in a leading article on 29 May:

'But how can one demand a sense of national self-respect of those speculative minds which see in Napoleon III the avenging arm of history and, in his alleged genius for liberating the peoples, complacently admire the reflection of the ineptitude, pedantry and aridity of their own categorising intellects.'

The very insistence with which Lassalle required of me not to write any more to his cousinc is evidence that the fellow carried on his intrigues in my name also. Thus the blockhead has frustrated the best prospect I had for the summer. Besides, in certain eventualities it would be a good thing if I had some say in the Vienna Presse.

When you next write about Garibaldi, WHATEVER MAY BE HIS FATE, crack a joke about the curious position in which only 'his uncle's nephew"1 could have found himself, namely that beside him the leader of the volunteer corps figures as a HERO. Can you imagine anything of the kind happening under the old Napoleon? By the by, in today's Times the Paris correspondent writes that the Bonapartists are already GRUMBLING loudly about Garibaldi's 'fame', and that A FEW SELECT POLICE have been smuggled into his corps and send in detailed reports about him.e Adhering strictly to Mazzini's instructions, Garibaldi omitted all mention of Bonaparte in his proclamation.441 Mazzini's latest thing' is not, by the by, as good as

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 434-35. - b Ferdinand Lassalle, author of Die Philosophie

[^2]: Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos. - l Max Friedländer - d Napoleon III - e The Times, No. 23321, 1 June 1859. - ' Mazzini's manifesto 'La Guerra' published in Pensiero ed Azione, No. 17, 2-16 May 1859.



