---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "256. Marx to Franz Duncker. 30 May "
Page_Range: "491-492"
---

# 256. Marx to Franz Duncker. 30 May 



**[p. 456]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Incidentally, Blind is no longer with the Hermann, but is greatly mistaken if he's hoping to get onto the Volk. Feeble though the little sheet may be, it has made the entire emigration down here froth at the mouth with rage. Among others Tausenau and Co., who are paid by Kossuth-Bonaparte to form German OPINION' in London.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

258

MARX TO FRANZ DUNCKER

London, 2 June 1859

Dear Sir,

I am indeed very sorry if I wrote you an offensive letter.b Please allow me, therefore, to say a few words in extenuation. To begin with I have in fact been away from Germany for too long and have grown too accustomed to conditions in London to form a correct estimate of the way business is conducted in Germany. Secondly, as I informed Lassalle some two months ago,c I am engaged in negotiations with a London publisher with regard to an English rendering of the first instalment.d The constantly misleading information which I, constantly labouring as I was

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: a Pensiero ed Azione - b See this volume, pp. 453-54. - <•' See this volume, pp. 407-10. - d K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.



