---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "258. Marx to Franz Duncker. 2 June "
Page_Range: "493-494"
---

# 258. Marx to Franz Duncker. 2 June 



**[p. 458]**

I shall speak to Biskamp on the Manchester question. For his part, he asked me yesterday to write and tell you that not a single copy had been ordered in Manchester. It looks to me as though Hollinger (the printer) has already been bribed by Kinkel. Nous verrons.0

Kinkel, following an audience with Kossuth and money pay- ments from Vogt, has gone over to the camp of high treason. Bücher and Blind have resigned in 'indignation'. Kinkel's col- leagues are now as follows: Bamberger, Ed. Bauer, Beta (How do you do?) and Bornd (our ex-Born'se brother). A fine lot. Add to which one or two old whores.

Ad vocem Freiligrath. Between ourselves, a rotter. Having now seen that things are taking a revolutionary TURN (you must have heard about the labour RIOT in Berlin44 ) and that Kinkel is becoming DISRESPECTABLE, he reviles him. But the sixth and last volume of his collected works (s/é of it translated rubbish) published in America, which he has just received and sent me, concludes with the poem about Johanna Mockel/ whereas he has suppressed the anfi-Kinkel poem.8 This is a filthy thing to do and it was with very sceptical mien that I listened to his excuses on the subject. The devil take the bardic profession.

Ad vocem Vogt. Has placed himself at Prussia's 'disposal' in the Volks-Zeitung (Berlin).

Ad vocem Duncker. That dolt Duncker, to whom I had written in exceedingly rude terms about his dilly-dallying, has sent me a letter admitting outright that the last delay of 3 weeks (when everything had been completed save for the list of misprints) was due to the publication of the 'anonymous pamphlet',b the one concocted of 'sweat, fire and logic'.422 I deliberately divulged to the press the fact that you were the author of Po and Rhine, 43 because

[^1]: a [K. Vogt,] 'Zur Warnung', Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150 (supplement), 2 June 1859. - b The article was reprinted with editorial comments in Das Volk, No. 6, 11 June 1859. - c We shall see. - d David Born - c Stephan Born - f F. Freiligrath, 'Nach Johanna Kinkels Begräbnis' (see this volume, p. 359). - 8 F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer'. - h [F. Lassalle,] Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens.



