---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "259. Marx to Engels. 7 June "
Page_Range: "494-496"
---

# 259. Marx to Engels. 7 June 



**[p. 459]**

Finally, whatever happens and as soon as the MEANS READY, I shall come to Manchester for a few days as we have all sorts of things to settle.444

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Regards to lupullum." Tomorrow I shall send you copies of the Presse (in which quarter the 'anonymous one' has put a spoke in my wheel good and proper).

The rotten STAFF here is no joke, I assure you. Biskamp at least writes quickly and has a ready wit. Liebknecht is AN AWFUL NUISANCE. Due to his over-ingenious manoeuvrings, the little sheet was only able to publish the gossip about Kinkel and Bauer in a much attenuated form.b

Your article0 appeared in the Volk on the same day it arrived. The last number contains the preface to my affair,d i. e. with such omissions as Mr Biskamp thought fit.

260

[London,] 10 June 1859

Dear Lassalle,

Since I wrote to you last I have had to prepare and send off 15 printed sheets for the English-American cyclopaedia, which is

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published l n Enghsh for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. time XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE20

[^3]: IN BERLIN

[^4]: a the little wolf, i.e. Lupus (Wilhelm Wolff) - b Das Volk, No. 4, 28 May 1859 ('Vereins-Nachrichten'). See also this volume, p. 439. - c F. Engels, 'The Campaign in Italy'. - d A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy

[^5]: 16«





**[p. 460]**

This much for the present: Ad vocemd Sickingen: Shall read it as soon as I have time and let you have a reply.445

Ad vocem pamphlet In no way corresponds with my own view or that of my party friends in England. It is probable, by the by, that we shall express our view in print.

Ad vocem Duncker: Have written to tell him I'm sorry if my letter offended him. However it's a scandalous piece of procrastination. I received the last proof-sheete as much as 5 weeks ago. You can't expect me—once I have a contract—to behave towards a publisher or permit myself to be treated by him as though he were printing the thing only as a 'favour' to yourself. One good turn he has already done me, and that is to lose me my English publisher until further notice.

Ad vocem Vogt (Imperial bailiff)410: We possess evidence, not only that the man has received money for himself from Bonaparte, but also money to suborn Germans in the interests of Franco-Russian propaganda.420 Up till now he has succeeded only in the case of that politically negative quantity, Gottfried Kinkel.

Ad vocem Proudhon: Is said to have gone out of his mind and been put in a lunatic asylum in Brussels.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- . sart-Berlin 1922 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a The New American Cyclopaedia - b 10 June 1859 was a Friday. On Tuesdays and Fridays Marx sent off his articles to New York. - c [F. Lassalle,] Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens. - d As regards - e K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.



