---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "260. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 10 June "
Page_Range: "496-498"
---

# 260. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 10 June 



**[p. 261]**

MARX TO ENGELS20

IN MANCHESTER

London, 10 June 1859 Dear Frederick,

Two manuscripts received today. One of them splendid—yours on 'fortification', though I must say I feel some twinges of conscience about having made such demands on the litde spare time you have. One grotesque, viz. Lassalle's reply to myself and you respecting his Sickingen.445 A whole sheaf of closely written pages. Incredible that at this season and in the present historical circumstances, a man should not only find time to produce stuff of this kind himself, but actually presume that we have time to read it.

Ad vocema Volk. Should your booksellers actually deliver the little paper to you, which I doubt, you and Lupus will be surprised to see in tomorrow's issue an announcement that there is some 'prospect' of our, etc., collaboration.b The diplomatic reasons which decided me to talce this step will be communicated by word of mouth.

Duncker: Nothing yet received, neither money nor copies.0 Tell Lupus about this; he'd already have had one otherwise.

Ad vocem Schramm*: This great man was a failure in Berlin. His wife's family council therefore decided that he should take a minor commercial post in Krefeld. Thereupon the 'failure' addressed a long scrawl to the Ministers in Berlin saying he had considered it his political duty to join combat with Minister Manteuffel, whom he abhorred, but now, having fulfilled that duty, and finding that Prussia was not à sa hauteur à lui,c requested to be released from the commonwealth of subjects. Granted, and Schramm arrived in London along with the other PARCELS. NOW intends, as he warned the Hohenzollern cabinet, to get himself 'naturalised' an Englishman. The worst blow that has befallen Prussia since the batde of Jena.46

Ad vocem Lassalle. In reply to his gigantic manuscript, wherein, by the by, he also mentions the 'anonymous' pamphlet' he wrote

[^1]: a As regards - b 'Statement by the Editorial Board of the Newspaper Dos Volk' - c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - d Rudolf Schramm - e good enough for him - f [F. Lassalle,] Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens.





**[p. 462]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, ,. , . ,. . , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, f l r s t t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

262

MARX TO FRANZ DUNCKER

IN BERLIN

Manchester,444 22 June [1859]

Dear Sir,

without delay to my wife in London.

In the letter you wrote me at the end of May you said that the book would come out and the fee be paid 'next week'. Neither the one nor the other was done until today, 22 June. Your principle would seem to be that a 'strictly scientific work' can never come out too late and, more particularly, that one should wait until such time as the general spread of the war 37° has stimulated a 'strictly scientific' interest.

The same circumstances as have induced you to sanction this further postponement might, perhaps, justify a postponement until 1860, particularly in view of what you say in your letter, namely that, in the case of scientific works in respect of which there is no undertaking as to the time of publication, it is customary for German publishers to place an embargo on their appearance in favour of topical works whenever this would seem to be opportune.

[^1]: I would request you to send the balance of the fee for my book b

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 459-60. - b A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



