---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "261. Marx to Engels. 10 June "
Page_Range: "498-499"
---

# 261. Marx to Engels. 10 June 



**[p. 463]**

Yours very faithfully,

Dr K. Marx

First published in International Review of Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. X, Part 1, 1965

Published in English for the first time

263

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 July 1859

DEAR Frederick,

You must have been wondering about my long silence, but there was a perfectly natural explanation for it. During the first week448

I had to scurry round like mad in an attempt to get Das Volk into some kind of order, and this week PRIVATE MATTERS obtruded.

WELL. T h e state of the Volk when I got back was as follows: Kinkel had been felled by our latest quips. (Since then I have gone on with the 'GATHERINGS'. 49 In the current issue I'll do this section by myself. Unless, of course, some piece of news gives Biskamp occasion to introduce a few more drolleries.) But at the same time Das Volk showed every sign of disintegrating, and it was doubtful whether it would continue to appear. During my absence debts had been contracted amounting to over £ 6 , since the 'agents', printer, 3 old Uncle T o m Cobley and all suspected that my return would put an e n d to the fun. Biskamp was IN THE MOST DEJECTED STATE. He had been given notice by the Kölnischeb (having been denounced by a competitor); to receive charity from Speck went against the grain, and he had therefore spent several nights camping out in the 'park'. Finally, the printer had been approached by 'genuine democrats, likewise socialists, but moder- ate, and inimical to any kind of personal politics (Blind?)', who were prepared to take over Das Volk and provide the necessary subsidies. SUCH WAS THE GENERAL STATE OF THINGS WHEN I ARRIVED AT LONDON.

[^1]: a Fidelio Hollinger - b Kölnische Zeitung



