---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "263. Marx to Engels. 14 July "
Page_Range: "500-502"
---

# 263. Marx to Engels. 14 July 



**[p. 465]**

I would draw your attention to the first article in The Free Press?' which I am sending you.

Salut

Your

K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, jgj3 Published in English for the first time

264

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Friday, 15 Julyc 1859

Dear Moor,

I'd have written something about the peace450 for the Volk, but since I neither see nor hear anything of what's going on, I conclude that you are dealing with the subject yourself and hence that my article would be double emploi?

Excepting the continuation of the war, nothing could be more welcome to us than this peace. Prussia discredited, Austria discredited, Bonaparte discredited, Sardinia and vulgar Italian liberalism discredited, England discredited, Kossuth ruined, Vogt & Co. discredited, no gains for anybody except the Russians and the revolutionaries, i. e. what little Jew Braune would call a 'tidy revolutionary situation'.451 But His Excellency Ephraim Artfule is the most discredited of all.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, ,. ,q,Q Published in English tor the first time

[^2]: a A reference to Lassalle's pamphlet Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens. - b 'Memoir on Russia, for the Instruction of the Present Emperor', The Free Press, No. 7, 13 July 1859. - c A slip of the pen in the original: 14 July. - d needless duplication - e By 'little Jew Braun' and, below, 'Ephraim Artful' Engels means Ferdinand Lassalle.





**[p. 265]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 July 1859

DEAR Frederick,

Since the last number of the Volk proved so very exiguous, I intend this week to put something in about Russia. It would please me greatly if an article by you could appear at the same time. Wouldn't it be possible to do something military summing u p the campaign, or else ridiculing the whole affair?" But it would have to be here by Thursday. If the little sheet fails to appear on Friday, it always means a serious loss of revenue; last time this fell off appreciably, another reason being that we suddenly had to change all our agents and get rid of Scherzer among others. T h e CLOWN Edgar Bauer (an admirer of Bonaparte) has uttered a mighty threat, viz. that we are to be attacked in the next Hermann. Nous verrons \

Have you seen my book c advertised anywhere yet? Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Little Jenny has been awarded THE GENERAL PRIZE, Laura two special prizes.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a In compliance with Marx's request Engels wrote an article entided 'The Italian War. Retrospect'. - b We shall see. - c A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



