---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "264. Engels to Marx. 15 July "
Page_Range: "502-503"
---

# 264. Engels to Marx. 15 July 



**[p. 266]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 18 July 1859 Dear Moor,

I shall send you tomorrow or the day after the £5 still required to pay off the Volk's arrears. It was too late for me to do it today, and besides I have the company of the 'little man', scilicet3

Dronke, who sidled up to me at the Exchange; the little chap's business seems to be doing passably well. Apart from current day-to-day gossip, on which he holds forth like a pothouse politician, he seems reluctant to talk about politicis, particularly of the past, and this I encourage, for after all I treat him as an extraneus.h His knowledge, however, has not increased, and the profundity of his politics may be summed up in his remark that the Italians 'have got to hit out now, or they're not worth a thing'.

But to revert from the little man to the Volk; we must at once discuss what is to be done. If the £7 you took with you has vanished so quickly, and the louts' £3 15/- as well, the £3 I have in reserve will doubtless soon be gone too. Que faire?c I've heard nothing about Strohn's return. There's not much more to be done with Borchardt. As soon as Lupus returns—but heaven knows where he is—I shall at all events get him to carry out a reconnaissance. Before that I wouldn't care to approach him personally. Nor do I run across him any more, though I've several times kept half an eye open for him in Oxford Road.

At any rate you must let me know sometime exactly how matters stand financially under the new administration, so that I can have an answer ready to eventual queries. How many copies are now being sold? Have you cut down the newsboys, etc., to 1/2d per copy? What do the total weekly expenses amount to and what is the income—hence what is the deficit?

Mr Thimm has been talked round very nicely. Das Volk is now displayed in his window IN A CONSPICUOUS POSITION, a much better one than the Hermann and the KOJIOKOJIK, which flank it. A few more 'Gatherings' and the last-named"1 will doubtless be done for

[^1]: a to wit - b outsider - c What is to be done? - d Engels has 'den letzteren', probably a slip of the pen; 'den ersteren' ('the first-named') would fit the context better, as the 'Gatherings' were directed against the Hermann, not against the KOJIOKOJIÎ>.



