---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "265. Marx to Engels. 18 July "
Page_Range: "503-504"
---

# 265. Marx to Engels. 18 July 



**[p. 468]**

Next week's LEADER on the peace ought to be done by you. It's important, I think, since we've been lucky enough to get hold of the secret articles,b that this point be fully exploited. As you are making a Tribune article0 out of it anyway, that should be easy for you. This point may well give the Volk a significance of quite a tlifferent order, and exact for it a position in the press. Think this over.

Let me know also by return what you people would like me to write about this week; then I shall do it on Wednesday evening.

I have sent for the Portfolio and am studying these and other Russian documents and Palmerstoniana; shall also get hold of as many BACK NUMBERS of The Free Press as possible. It's really high time I went through the stuff, seeing what importance the thing is now assuming. Can you tell me where the Russian memorandum on Russian policyd originated and which Prussian ministerial crisis brought it to the light of day452? So far as I am concerned the internal EVIDENCE and the classic phraseology are, of course, more than sufficient, but I need these FACTS for the debate with Philistia; anyway it is stupid of Urquhart to be so unnecessarily secretive.

Is there anything to be wormed out of Blind quoad" Vogt420? The 'little man' doesn't believe the thing, of course, and asks 'why, then, didn't we see to it that the documents were printed'?

Generally speaking the documents in Vol. 1 of the Portfolio are not the most important, though there are some nice things among them, particularly those by Pozzo di Borgo and the memorandum to the German governments.' What idiots they are and how the Russians must laugh at them!

The memorandum in The Free Press is a true classic from start to finish, including the almost comical way in which the worthy diplomats make out that regicide is at once self-sacrifice and a republican virtue. Still, it seems to be going a bit far when Nicholas8 gives his sonh this kind of lesson with regard to the

[^1]: a G. Kinkel, 'An unsere Leser', Hermann, No. 26, 2 July 1859. - b See this volume, p. 464. - c K. Marx, 'The Treaty of Villafranca'. - d 'Memoir on Russia, for the Instruction of the Present Emperor', The Free Press, No. 7, 13 July 1859. - e concerning - f 'Copy of a Despatch from Count Pozzo di Borgo, Addressed to Count Nesselrode. Dated Paris, 10th (22nd) December, 1826'; 'Copy of a Very Secret Despatch from Count Pozzo di Borgo, dated Paris, the 28th November, 1828'; 'Memoir on the State and Prospects of Germany, Drawn up under the Direction of a Minister at St. Petersburgh, and Confidentially Communicated to Several of the German Governments'. - s Nicholas I - h future Emperor Alexander II



