---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "267. Marx to Engels. 19 July "
Page_Range: "504-506"
---

# 267. Marx to Engels. 19 July 



**[p. 469]**

Is it not possible to get hold of the complete document? Dronke tells me that in Glasgow there is a STATIONER by the name of Love in St. Enoch Square who sells the Hermann and would be a very suitable man to sell Das Volk. It might be a good idea to send him a few copies and a letter.

Have you sent it to America? It's about time you did. T o Weydemeyer, Steffen and the chap in New Yorka who once wrote to you about communist matters.297

Warmest regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published m English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

267

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 19 July 1859

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: DEAR Frederick,

[^3]: I would gladly have written the article on the peace, for it would simply have meant combining last Friday's and today's articles for the Tribune^ They were, moreover, good articles, for ira facit poetam.c

[^4]: However, as Biskamp has begun the thing, has already announced No. II, d and is effectively, or at least nominally, in command, decency precludes one interfering in this way. Once he is in Edmonton, his very remoteness will ensure that at crucial moments such as this the

[^5]: a Friedrich Kamm - b Marx refers to his articles 'The Peace' and 'The Treaty of Villafranca'. - c Anger gives wings to one's words. An allusion to 'Facit indignatio versum'—'Indignation makes verse' (Juvenal, Satires, I, 79). - d [E. Biskamp,] 'Der Friede von Villa Franca', Das Volk, No. 11, 16 July 1859. The second instalment was published in the next issue of Das Volk on 23 July.





**[p. 470]**

But what the two of us can do to put some stiffening into the next issue, is support him on his left and right flanks. On the pretext of discussing Urquhart's document," I shall briefly sum up Russia's PART in this tragi-comedy and at the same time disparage Bonaparte.454 You, on the pretext of writing a final article on military affairs,1" must also set about Bonaparte, etc. (and on the same occasion take a swipe at Prussia). In my view it is of the utmost importance morally that a belief in Bonaparte's greatness should not be allowed to arise among the Germans. As for Austria, the agreed LINE we have adopted of blaming everything on the sovereignc is SUFFICIENT.

Ad vocemd the document. Fell into the hands of the 'Prince of Prussia'6 during the regency crisis on the occasion of Manteuffel's sudden removal.336 More than that is not to be coaxed out of Urquhart's idiots. Certain passages have been forged because they didn't get hold of the complete document.452 The authenticity of the whole is vouched for by the style peculiar to all, even 'secret', Russian documents, in which certain stereotyped, conventional untruths take turn and turn about. It is a LINE even Pozzo di Borgo adopts in his writing. The plain truth about Russia's machinations comes to light only with the chance publication of the documents of Russian agents not in the direct employ of the Russian state. E.g. Theyls' (a Dutchman) and Patkul's (came out in Berlin in 1796) memoirs and correspondence.'

Portfolio. I shall obtain for you (and myself) from Paris the complete edition published there of the PAPERS of which the Portfolio was allowed to contain only those authorised by Palmer- ston.

Volk. Agents' remuneration reduced to ^fad. Expenditure has been heavy because Biskamp required personal sustenance; because the rows the fellows were having with each other during my absence444 meant that the administration was at sixes and sevens; because the entire staff has been changed since my return. By the end of the week I shall have a full statement of accounts. This involves a great deal of work in view of the way the thing has been run hitherto. £4-£5 worth of advertising will have to be obtained

[^1]: a 'Memoir on Russia, for the Instruction of the Present Emperor', The Free Press, No. 7, 13 July 1859. - b F. Engels, 'The Italian War. Retrospect'. - c Francis Joseph I - d As regards - e William - f W. Theyls, Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de Charles XII, roi de Suède; J. R. von Patkul, Berichte an das Zaarische Cabinet in Moscau, von seinem Gesandschafts-Posten bei August II, Könige von Polen, Th. I-III.



