---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "268. Engels to Marx. 20 or 21 July "
Page_Range: "506-507"
---

# 268. Engels to Marx. 20 or 21 July 



**[p. 471]**

Biskamp wanted to write a short review of my Critique of Political Economy, etc. I dissuaded him, for he knows nothing about the subject. But since he has undertaken (in the Volk) to say something about it, I should like you to do it for him3 (say next week, but not this). Briefly on the method and what is new in the content. In this way you would set the tone for the correspondents down here. And likewise help frustrate Lassalle's plan to KILL me.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

268

ENGELS TO MARX455

[Manchester, 20 or 21 July 1859]

Dear Moor,

Herewith the article.b If it's too long cut it short somewhere and return me the manuscript of the unprinted portion so that I know where to start again.

Also a POST OFFICE order made out to you, this being the three pounds for the Volk.

The little manc pushes off tomorrow. He has bought the entire Free Press for 1859 as I have, ditto 1858. However much the Piccolo may chew away at it he won't digest a great deal. I asked him whether any money could be raised for the Völkchen in Glasgow; he thought not. I did this deliberately en passant. However, if you think it would serve some purpose I shall write to him; since tie has just been partially restored to grace, it may

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Engels did write a review: 'Karl Marx. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy'. - b F. Engels, 'The Italian War. Retrospect'. - ' Ernst Dronke



