---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "269. Marx to Engels. 22 July "
Page_Range: "507-509"
---

# 269. Marx to Engels. 22 July 



**[p. 472]**

père Freiligrath, too, ought to fork out a £5 note. If the louts can pay, so can he, and after all if our party has to support the paper out of its own money for the present, the fat philistine must also do his bit.

Many regards to the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 2, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1930 , r , r Published in English for the first time

269

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 July 1859

Dear Engels,

£3 received. Immediately paid out £2 to Hollinger and 15/- to Lessner. Out-of-town subscriptions are increasing (there are already 60) but are not payable until the end of the quarter and call for a weekly ouday on STAMPS. I am now convinced, 1. that there was a debt of ABOUT £7 of which I was not told before I left for Manchester444; 2. that the advertisements (instead of £5, receipts were ABOUT 20/-) and Mr Scherzer's London subscrip- tions— I have sacked him—were just a piece of private skuldug- gery. With proper MANAGEMENT, which is now under way but whose results won't make themselves felt for weeks to come, the advertisements alone will pay for the little sheet. Since more money is needed immediately, write to Dronke. If you tell the litde man that for the time being the paper can only exist by party sacrifices and hence we are asking all party members to make such sacrifices, he can, if he wishes, get the letter printed. I am convinced that, within 6 weeks, the thing will be on a solid footing. But there can be no question of giving it up now that Gagern and



**[p. 473]**

You forgot to let me know whether you wish to do a review of my piece.c There is great rejoicing among the fellows here. They imagine the thing's a failure because they are ignorant of the fact that Duncker hasn't even advertised it yet. Should you write something, don't forget, 1. that it extirpates Proudhonism root and branch, 2. that the specifically social, by no means absolute, character of bourgeois production is analysed straight away in its simplest form, that of the commodity. Mr Liebknecht informed Biskamp that 'never has a book disappointed him so much', and Biskamp himself told me that he didn't see 'à quoi bon'.d Is Lupus back?

In your second article on the ware you will not, I am sure, forget to stress the inadequate strength of the pursuit after victory had been won, and the pitiful whining of Bonaparte, who had at last got to the point where Europe did not, as hitherto, out of fear of revolution, permit him to play the old Napoleon within given limits. In this connection it would be pertinent to recall the 1796-97 campaign, when France was not able to take her time

[^1]: a Marx probably means Engels' article 'Historical Justice'. - b K. Marx, 'Truth Testified'. In this article Marx cites Francis Joseph's manifesto of 15 July 1859 (reported in The Times, No. 23364, 21 July 1859) and Napoleon Ill's speech at a reception for members of the State Council, the Senate and the Corps législatif in the Palace of Saint-Cloud on 19 July 1859 (Le Moniteur universel, No. 201, 20 July 1859). - c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - d 'what use it was' - e 'The Italian War. Retrospect' (was published in three instalments in Das Volk)



