---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "270. Engels to Marx. 25 July "
Page_Range: "509-511"
---

# 270. Engels to Marx. 25 July 



**[p. 474]**

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Can't anything be got out of Heckscher? Have you written to Duncker? Ask Dronke to write for us as well.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, igi3 Published in English for the first time

270

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 25 July 1859

Dear Moor,

Allgemeine Zeitung and Kölnische Zeitung. I can't possibly do an article on it this week; it is quite an undertaking and I should have had NOTICE of it somewhat earlier. Besides, I've begun the military article13 and want to get it finished quickly. However, I promise to do the article for next week.c

Some nonsense was edited into my last article. I said that, during the march from Pavia, the 5th corps so exerted itself on the 3rd and 4thd that, had the 4'/2 hours lost through the halt been put to use, the result would not have been materially different, nor would the corps have arrived on the battle-field

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: Have written to Duncker.456 Also about the total absence up till now of any advertisements of your book3 in the Augsburg

[^3]: d A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy - b 'The Italian War. Retrospect' - c 'Karl Marx. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy' - d 3 and 4 June 1859.

[^4]: Engels speaks of the first instalment of his article 'The Italian War. Retrospect'.





**[p. 475]**

How, by the way, could you permit Herwegh's lousy poema to be included?

Quanto al danaro,b Dronke will be back here again in a fortnight's time (about 10 days from now, that is), so I shall have to put everything off till then. Nor have I any news of Lupus. Where to get money from in the meantime is difficult to say. I'll try Heckscher, but just now I have my hands full and a great deal of my time is taken up with the article on your book. If only Strohn were here! Gumpert is at home, confined to bed with laryngitis and unable to speak. However, I shall see; if at all possible Heckscher will have to keep the paper going this week. But the miserly Freiligrath should certainly be made to cough up.

How funny that you should have obtained so flattering an opinion from Mr Liebknecht too.c It's just like these folk. The gentlemen are so used to our doing their thinking for them that invariably and without exception they want to have everything presented to them not only on a platter, but already pre-digested, not only the quintessence in the smallest possible space, but also a detailed exposition, READY COOKED AND DRIED. One is expected to perform miracles, ni plus ni moins.6 What does an ass of that species really want? As though he couldn't discover for himself from the first 3 lines of the preface that this first instalment was to be followed by at least 15 others before he got to the final conclusions. Naturally, the solutions to ticklish monetary problems, etc., mean nothing whatever to Liebknecht, seeing that such problems simply don't exist for him. But the least one could ask of

[^1]: a Engels refers to Georg Herwegh's poem written on the occasion of the Federal Marksmen's Festival in Zurich and published in Das Volk, No. 12, 23 July 1859. - b As for money - c See this volume, p. 473. - d neither more nor less



