---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "271. Marx to Engels. 1 August "
Page_Range: "511-513"
---

# 271. Marx to Engels. 1 August 



**[p. 476]**

The Russian document452 ought not to be reprinted in such short BITS, otherwise one completely loses the thread.3 Mr Petersen's lucubrations also become tedious in the long run.b457 It's true you were in difficulty last week.

Mr Bonaparte's speeches get ever more comical. The one he made before the diplomatic corps is really too funny.c And the fellow kept clapping his hand to his sword all the while! The fool seems quite seriously determined to impose himself on the world as the 'old one',*1 at least so far as le dehors' is concerned.

Kossuth has been spreading it about that he's been away in Lussinpiccolo!f

Many regards.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

271

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 1 August 1859

DEAR Frederick,

D'abord* I must acknowledge the £2 10/-. This time I myself corrected the proofs of your article.11 If it still contains misprints,

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a A reference to 'Russisches Memoir zur Belehrung des gegenwärtigen Kaisers' (Das Volk, Nos. 12-16, 23 and 30 July and 6, 13 and 20 August 1859), a German translation of 'Memoir on Russia' published in The Free Press, No. 7, 13 July 1859. - b [N.] P[etersen,] 'Feierstunden-Arbeit eines Arbeiters', Das Volk, Nos. 8-10, 12 and 16, 25 June; 2, 9 and 23 July; 20 August 1859. - c Napoleon III made this speech on 21 July 1859 and it was published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 203, 22 July 1859. - d Napoleon I - e outward appearance - f Town in Lussin island in the Adriatic, then under Austrian rule. - s First - h 'The Italian War. Retrospect'





**[p. 477]**

What is catastrophic so far as I'm concerned is that Biskamp isn't going to Edmonton but (it would seem) has accepted the post of tutor chez Bibra (the innkeeper) in the middle of the West End. If this is so I shall press for a written agreement with the gentleman. For, like all professional humorists he's a capricious, hysterical old woman, and we're not going to right the apple-cart so that someone else can drive it away. We must make sure we get possession of the thing.

Linac is back here from Cologne. Bürgers has grown quite 'high-minded' since his release. He reprobates the Volk's 'rever- sion' to the old manner of using 'bad jokes' to split the 'party'. For him, it would seem, the 'party' comprises anyone who is 'not' official, and that includes Vogt and Kinkel. Needless to say these 'hints' were given merely out of tender regard for 'me'. 'One' copy of my work had arrived at Bermbach's for the dozen or so party friends in Cologne. Bürgers hadn't read it, of course, nor will he, 'but in my interests' expressed his indignation that the thing should be coming out 'by dribs and drabs' and not all 60 sheets AT ONCE. For the rest, he's tutor at some 'merchant's', which only takes up a few hours each morning, and apart from that he gives one other lesson. All in all, he earns 700 talers. His 'work' is confined to mornings. After the midday meal he starts 'recovering' from his half day's work and lounges about chatting by the hour at Mrs Daniels' house where, however, he has a serious rival in Dr Klein. But in the evenings he hurries to Löllchen's to preside with great dignity over the Cologne debating club until far into the night. He 'esteems' Lassalle's activities but hasn't 'read' anything of his, not even Franz von Sickingen. The spurious pretext of having contracted a serious chest complaint during his time in prison has provided him with a splendid means of masking his habitual idleness. In addition, the 'high-minded man' frequents 'music clubs'. As regards the Cologne trial71 he actually repeated to Lina several most infamous and far from unwitting lies, e.g. that it was us not him and the other asses in Cologne who sent that ass

[^1]: a ['On the Occasion of the Federal Marksmen's Festival in Zurich',] Das Volk, No. 12, 23 July 1859. - b This explanation by the Editorial Board was published in Das Volk, No. 13, 30 July 1859. - c Caroline Schöler - d A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy



