---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "272. Engels to Marx. 3 August "
Page_Range: "513-514"
---

# 272. Engels to Marx. 3 August 



**[p. 478]**

As soon as you have some hours to spare, it would be a good thing to go ahead with 'Infantry'.3 My finances are closely linked with this. I should like to send my wife to the seaside for a few weeks. But that would be feasible only if I could draw an additional sum on America.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t i m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

272

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 3 August 1859 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Herewith the beginning of the article about your book.b Take a good look at it and, if you don't like it in toto, tear it up and let me have your opinion. Through lack of practice I have grown so unused to this sort of writing that your wife will be greatly tickled by my awkwardness. If you can knock it into shape, do so. A few convincing examples of the materialistic viewpoint would not come amiss, in place of my indifferent reference to the February revolution^

As soon as I've done with this thing, I shall set to work on 'Infantry', which will, however, demand a good deal of time and

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a an article for The New American Cyclopaedia - b F. Engels, 'K. Marx. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy'. - c Engels means the 1848 revolution in France and subsequent revolutionary events in other European countries.



