---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "273. Marx to Engels. 8 August "
Page_Range: "514-516"
---

# 273. Marx to Engels. 8 August 



**[p. 479]**

Can you shed any further light on the particulars contained in Crawshay's letter in The Free Press of 27 July regarding the Russian document? b Surely the 'German' isn't Mr Bücher? And in which German paper is the thing supposed to have appeared?460

When you saw Blind, did you speak to him about the Vogt affair?461 N'y avait-il rien à faire?c

The gentle Heinrich0 is acquitting himself well in his new role. Gloomy as ever, but all the lazier for that, redeeming the world by his courageous and intelligent GRUMBLING.

Lupus has had another adventure, this time with a parson who swapped travelling bags with him. The deadly earnestness of the affair was, however, alleviated by the fact that the bag that had been left behind contained the said parson's MAIDEN SERMON which he was due to rattle off the following day. This lent the thing certain humorous extérieurs,'' otherwise Lupus was again on the point of exclaiming: * 'There are so many rogues in this country, and not of the working class, but of the middle class.' *

Your

F. E.

273

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 August 1859

Dear Engels,

As a result of an attack of vomiting that has now lasted for two whole days, I am as weak as a fly and hence cannot write more than a few lines.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engeb und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t i m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a W. Rüstow, Geschichte der Infanterie. - b G. Crawshay, 'The Russian Memoir of 1837', The Free Press, No. 8, 27 July 1859. - c Could nothing be done about it? - d Heinrich Bürgers - e aspects





**[p. 480]**

Last Monday (Monday is always settlement day; i.e. a week ago today) the toted deficit had been reduced to no more than about £2. (This did not, of course, include the charge for No. 13, which only has to be met today, and still less for No. 14, where payment doesn't fall due until today week. The issues are, of course, only charged at the end of the week following publication.) So things are in good shape. But today there is further expenditure to be met, in addition to the usual £1 extra (15/- for Lessner, 5 for the OFFICE). I myself am under so much PRESSURE that I cannot at this moment advance a single FARTHING and am, moreover, wasting an inordinate amount of time over the business. As for philistine Freiligrath, he imagines that he is giving adequate proof of his 'convictions' by maintaining a 'neutral' attitude towards ourselves and the Hermann.

Ledru and L. Blanc have united to publish a paper, the Union Républicaine. It is to appear at the beginning of next month from the same press as the Volk, and would benefit the latter in as much as Hollinger would then print by machine instead of by hand as heretofore.462 It makes the continued existence of the Volk all the more essential, by the by.

Later on (as soon as I'm fit again), I shall write to Germany about the business. And to Borchardt too?

To make the thing a PAYING proposition more quickly, fresh outlays would be necessary in a town like London: errand-boys besides Lessner, etc.

Strohn not back yet? No answer yet from Duncker, the swine? Regards to Lupus and Gumpert.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



