---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "279. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 17 September "
Page_Range: "521-524"
---

# 279. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 17 September 



**[p. 278]**

ENGELS TO MARX467

IN LONDON

Manchester, [8 September 1859] 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Unfortunately the article can't be sent today. It's now 7 o'clock and I still have at least half an hour's work at the office; it takes me V2 hour to get home and, what is more, I haven't yet set eyes on The Times, nor should I be able to borrow it for this evening. I'd have to finish the whole thing by 11.30 at the latest if I were to get it off—it's clairement impossible, particularly in the case of names which have been wrongly telegraphed and can only be deciphered after one has spent ages poring over the map. However, I'll go over the material for Tuesday and, should the Calcutta MAIL be in by Monday, rectify it accordingly.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

279

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

London, 17 September 1859

Dear Liebknecht,

I should ere now have returned Blind's letter of 8th Sep- tember,468 which you passed on to me, had not various passages therein made it necessary for me to take further steps to ascertain the facts of the case.

In this letter Blind maintains that he had had 'nothing whatever to do with the problem in question' (i.e. with the public denunciation of Vogt). He further maintains that 'the remarks' he made 'in the course of a private conversation'461 (implying that he's only spoken about Vogt 'in private') 'were completely misinterpreted'. The words

[^1]: IN LONDON



1. Vogt was a tool used by Bonaparte to corrupt liberals in Germany and German revolutionaries abroad. Vogt further offered 30,000 gulden to a certain liberal writer in Germany in order to win him over in the interests of Bonapartist propagan- da.—These two on-dit3 were imparted to me IN THE MOST SERIOUS MANNER by Blind on 9 May, the day of Urquhart's first meeting. He imparted them to Freiligrath. He imparted them to others. He repeated, or rather reaffirmed, them in your presence, in Holling- er's presence, in my presence, on the day we all three of us had AN INTERVIEW with him. In regard to these two points, therefore, there can be no question of any interpretation, false or otherwise. They have been admitted. They can be proved by evidence. They are FACTS in so far as we consider Blind's statements as FACTS.

2. Now as to Blind's 'interpretation'— minus the name Vogt qua agent of Bonapartist corruption, and minus the affair of the 30,000 gulden—it is to be found in an article in the London Free Press dated 27 May with the heading: 'The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary'. Blind is the author of this article in which he says that *he 'knows the name of a Swiss Senator to whom he (Prince Jerome Napoleon) broached the subject'*, and even knows what Plon-Plon DID BROACH TO THE Swiss SENATOR; in which he further * knows of 'the attempts made to win over to the Russo-Napoleonic scheme some of the exiled German Democrats, as well as some influential Liberals in Germany'*; in which he further KNOWS that *'large pecuniary advantages were held out to them as a bribe'*; and in which, finally, he is * 'glad that these offers were rejected with indigna- tion' *. This 'interpretation' is printed and did not therefore occur 'in the course of a private conversation'. Again, it would seem from this that Blind, far from having had nothing to do with 'the problem', played the part of initiator.

3. Add together 1. the facts related, and admitted to have been related, by Blind and 2. the 'interpretation' which Blind had

[^1]: a rumours



The anonymous pamphlet Zur Warnung minus a few irrelevant phrases. Whether or not Blind composed this pamphlet is therefore completely immaterial. He is responsible for publishing the elements which go to make it up.

He mentioned the name Vogt and the affair of the 30,000 gulden 'in the course of a private conversation'. Not only with me but with Freiligrath and others. And not as a private and 'confidential' matter but as political denunciation. He himself had the 'interpretation' relating to these two POINTS printed.

It is quite immaterial, therefore, whether or not the pamphlet which subsequently came out was composed by him! All it contains is the sum total of verbal Blind and printed Blind. It is Blind added together. Hence it was not only / who regarded him as its author. Freiligrath did too. He even questioned him about it.

Author or otherwise, it in no way alters the case. He is still the instigator responsible.

You will recall that at the above-mentioned meeting he stated on his word of honour that he had not composed the pamphlet. Composing and writing are in effect two separate things. I now have documentary, legally valid evidence (which is at your disposal) to the effect that the pamphlet was printed by F. Hollinger, was handed to him by Blind, was written in Blind's hand, and was regarded by F. Hollinger as Blind's product.469

What remains, then, is my interpretation, described not merely as a 'misinterpretation' but a 'complete misinterpretation'.

As regards the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, the relationship between myself and that paper has always been one of outright hostility. What is at issue in the law-suit that is to be heard in open court at Augsburg on the 28th of October470 is not a QUARREL between the A. A. Z. and Vogt but a legal ruling on the relationship between the German ex-imperial regent410 Vogt and the French EMPEROR Louis Bonaparte. In my view, then, what is at issue for every German revolutionary, even if not a member of a 'Fatherland Association',471 is not, in this instance, 'the affairs of a newspaper with which he had nothing whatever to do'; rather it is his own affair. That, however, is a matter of taste. De gustibus, etc.3

[^1]: Salut. Y o u r

[^2]: K. M. First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time a De gustibus non est disputandum—Tastes are not matters for discussion.



