---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "283. Engels to Marx. Between 24 and 26 September "
Page_Range: "527-528"
---

# 283. Engels to Marx. Between 24 and 26 September 

Salut. ., Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

283

ENGELS TO MARX477

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 Southgate [between 24 and 26 September 1859]

Dear Moor,

Enclosed fiver B/B 95281 Manchester, 1 January 1859. Shall deal with the other matters very shortly. For the present just one more point to which an answer is required by return if possible.

1. How much money is needed to return to those subscribers to the Volk who have paid direct, the few pence due to them in respect of undelivered copies?

2. What arrangement was made about this with Thimm and others? Have the booksellers deducted what was not delivered, OR HOW? Or not paid at all yet?

I must have clarification of these matters, if possible at once, and I shall, if possible, raise the money—it can't amount to much—to settle the sorry business of the direct subscribers. Up here the bourgeois are complaining like mad that they've been cheated, and Lupus and I have to swallow it all. So let me have an answer at once. The day before yesterday Lupus was involved in a row on this account and I shall have to see the 'third party' as soon as possible.

'Infantry' is in hand and if at all possible I shall finish it before the week is out.

