---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "284. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 26 September "
Page_Range: "528-530"
---

# 284. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 26 September 

The real joke is that the use of pretty well any instrument gives a LAWYER a HANDLE with which to sway a BRITISH JURY, namely moral indignation at BLOODY FOREIGNERS who don't use their fists, etc. In which case the verdict goes against the FOREIGNER as sure as 2x2=4, and on top of that he has to fork out the costs. Anyway you can count on it that I shall fork out no more than is absolutely necessary. As yet the affair hasn't progressed an inch but I hope it will soon be settled so that I may at least get a clear idea of what can be done to help you through the crisis.

Many regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

284

London, 26 September 1859

My dear Franck,

In reply to your letter d.d. Sept. 23 I beg to state: 1) On the arrival at London of the N. Y. T. containing P's declaration, which to sign with his name he had not dared," I sent the

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: MARX TO BERTALAN SZEMERE478

[^3]: IN PARIS

[^4]: a [F. Pulszky,] 'From Our Own Correspondent. Monday, August 7, 1859', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5720, 23 August 1859.

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time



As to the great London Daily Papers, it is quite out of the question to induce them to give publicity to a full exposure of Kossuth. The statement, in the first instance, would imply a libel case, which to stand the editors are, or at least affect to be, afraid of, considering the difficulty to prove such charges of bribery, and to summon the witnesses before a British tribunal. In the second instance, Kossuth is too unmitigated a humbug to not share the secret sympathies of the venal London press-gang. I have, however, put down a summary for the 'Free Press' (the Urquhartite paper which appears on the last Wednesday of every month)b I have authorised them, if they think it necessary, 'to dress the salad' in their own style, and I think myself warranted in supposing that the 'thing' is to come out this very week. In that case I shall forward you a copy. Although circulated among a very exclusive public, the Free Press finds its way to all the cabinets and capitals of Europe. It is well known at Constantinople. Besides, the statement having once appeared in the Free Press, some London correspondents, connected with the German press, and more or less influenced by me, will find it easier to transplant the thing to the Teutonic soil.

I enclose Asboth's declaration from the N. Y. T.c The turn now given to K's proceedings is, that that 'illustrious' patriot attempted only to prevent 'a premature rising in Hungary', and that the clever 'statesman' altogether^succeeded in this 'difficult' task.

Some time ago, Urquhart had his correspondence with Kossuth (which I alluded to, as you will recollect) translated into Italian, and copiously distributed throughout Italy.d

2) In regard to the wine-affair, I became informed, soon after your departure from London, that my brother-in-lawe was not to return to Amsterdam before October. I have, therefore, not yet written to him on the business.

For England I have till now vacillated between two men, both of whom, though in different ways, appear fit for undertaking the

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon'. - b [K. Marx,] 'Particulars of Kossuth's Transaction with Louis Napoleon'. - c A. Asboth, 'The Peace of Villafranca and the Hungarian Cause', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5727, 31 August 1859. - d Letters of L. Kossuth and D. Urquhart published in The Free Press, No. 16, 12 May 1858. - e Johann Carl Juta



