---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "286. Marx to Engels. 28 September "
Page_Range: "531-532"
---

# 286. Marx to Engels. 28 September 



**[p. 496]**

Send the names of the fellows with claims. Tell Thimm (on Biskamp's behalf) that he must not send another FARTHING here until he hears from us again. You may instruct him to pay 'bona fide' claimants in Manchester.

Biskamp has now taken lodgings at my expense here in Hampstead. The POOR DEVIL has had an operation for PLEURISY at the German hospital, where he spent 1 V2 weeks—sans sou.* All in all a nice state of affairs.

Today is article day, so I shall close.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . . . ,• Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and ^ s h e à m E " g h s h f ° r * * h r S t

Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

time

286

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 28 September [1859]

Dear Engels,

Yesterday evening I had a visit from Lessner, whom I had sent for in connection with the Manchester subscribers to the Volk.

Like Biskamp, he assures me that (apart from Lupus) there wasn't a single direct subscriber to the Volk. And up till now no one has sent a FARTHING to London.

After the Volk ceased publication Thimm wrote to Lessner asking for an account. Lessner replied that he could send him an account only in respect of the period in which he, Lessner, had been despatch clerk. He then sent him an invoice for the individual numbers. Up till yesterday there had been no reply from Thimm.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a without a penny



