---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "287. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. Not before 2 October "
Page_Range: "532-534"
---

# 287. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. Not before 2 October 

Down here we (and I especially) have unpleasantnesses enough in respect of the Volk without that.

The 'Particulars' about Kossuth in The Free Press are mine. (I have made 2 articles out of them for the Tribune479 and shall see whether they are accepted.) I got them from Szemere, partly in writing, partly by word of mouth. Szemere was here a few weeks ago.

Salut. Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

It's doubtful whether Biskamp will pull through. The poor devil is as low as can be. We seem to attract every damned spot of bother that's going.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

287

London, [not before 2 October 1859] 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

It is very good of you to be the first to take up the pen again, and this in a matter touching my interests, despite the fact that appearances speak against me.

As for my silence, let me say briefly: First, I didn't get either of your letters until weeks after their despatch, namely on my return to London from a journey to Scotland via Manchester, made for business reasons.444 Meanwhile

[^1]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE481

[^2]: IN BERLIN



my silence itself became an obstacle to my breaking it. On top of that—and I beg you not to regard this simply as a figure of speech—there was a whole series of domestic complications, as yet by no means eliminated, which in fact robbed me of all desire to write. So much for my silence, which, however, and despite all APPEARANCES TO THE CONTRARY, was in no way motivated by ill-will.

Now as to Duncker, on my return to London I found a letter from him which apparently rendered it impossible for me to make any further direct approach to the man regarding the sequel.478 On the other hand, not having written to you for so long, I couldn't possibly start off by suddenly writing to you about my own concerns. So I let the matter DROP, on the tacit assumption that, if I hadn't heard from Duncker by a certain date, I should have to approach another publisher.

However, one of your earlier letters led me to suppose that Duncker had undertaken to publish 2 instalments, or rather the first section ('Capital in General') in its entirety.d But on the other hand the first instalmente was much more compendious than had

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 460. - b [K. Blind.] Zur Warnung, Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 173 (supplement), 22 June 1859. - c An allusion to the following lines from Schiller's drama Wallenstein. Die Piccolomini, V, 1: 'Das eben ist der Fluch der bösen That,/Daß sie, fortzeugend, immer Böses muß gebären' ('This is the curse of every evil deed,/That, propagating still, it brings forth evil'). - d See this volume, pp. 270 and 368. - e K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy.



