---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "288. Engels to Marx. 3 October "
Page_Range: "534-536"
---

# 288. Engels to Marx. 3 October 



**[p. 499]**

I shall now be obliged to remodel the thing completely, as the manuscript for this second instalment is already a year old250; and, since my circumstances do not permit me to devote much time to the matter just now, I hardly think I shall be able to finish it before the end of December. That, however, would be at the very outside.

I am busy with an English rendering of the first instalment and this, too, has been disrupted by a bad domestic spell. At any rate I am assured of a better reception in England than in Germany where, so far as I am aware, nobody inquires after the thing or gives a straw for it. All I want is to place the whole of this first section, at least, before the German public. Should the latter continue to pay no heed to the work, I intend to put all subsequent sections straight into English and no longer concern myself with the German philistines.

Vale faveque.b

K. M.

288

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 3 October 1859

Dear Moor,

What you wrote and told me about Das Volk was most welcome news. It now transpires that the philistine who raised an outcry had taken out a subscription with Thimm après tout.c

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. II, Stuttgart- P u b l i s h e d in English in full for the Berlin, 1922 r. first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: What's this about proceedings in the COUNTY COURT0?

[^4]: a against his will. Cf. Molière's Le Médecin malgré lui. - b Good-bye and farewell. - c after all - d See this volume, p. 495.





**[p. 500]**

My quarrel not settled yet and might still be damnably long-drawn-out. But I've got the scoundrel3 pretty well pinned down and believe I can now stand back and watch; whatever happens, though, it's going to cost money—that's the most annoying thing about it; moreover, the LAW being what it is here, one can never be quite sure of one's case. At all events, things look a good deal better now.

The Free Press hadn't arrived the day before yesterday; I shall go and have another look presently. What sort of a branch is it that Urquhart has opened in Berlin?

So it now transpires that the Russian memorandum appeared in the Preussisches Wochenblattl (I've only just seen the August number of The Free Press.)**2 Apart from what's in The Free Press,b have you any other scandalous stuff about great men367?

Your

F. E.

Have a complete account made out for Thimm as soon as possible, i.e. covering the pre-Lessner period as well; the fellow apparently intends to pocket the money. But send me a full list of the people who subscribed through Thimm, so that I can keep a check on reimbursements and send round a circular telling people that they can reclaim their money from Thimm.

Siebel's indifferent verse0 was sent to the Hermann behind Siebel's back by a chap in Germany to whom he had written enclosing it. He promptly wrote to the editors, and only then did he learn how this had come about.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1913

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Daniells - b Engels means Marx's article 'Particulars of Kossuth's Transaction with Louis Napoleon'. - c 'Sprüche von Carl Siebel', Hermann, No. 33,20 August 1859. See this volume, p. 485.



