---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "289. Marx to Engels. 5 October "
Page_Range: "536-539"
---

# 289. Marx to Engels. 5 October 



**[p. 289]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 October [1859]

Dear Engels,

In view of the way things are managed here (Speck has gone bankrupt and disappeared; Garthe, the cashier, is in Brighton) and always have been managed so far as the Volk is concerned, it is impossible to obtain an accurate account AS TO FOREIGN [out-of- town] SUBSCRIBERS during the pre-Lessner period. Biskamp maintains that, with the exception of the very first issues, Thimm was always sent a dozen copies.

Hollinger is suing me for £12 and a couple of shillings arrears in respect of Das Volk, together with the type for the last issue, which did not appear. The dirty dog is trying to make out all of a sudden that I'm the 'proprietor', although the whole business, I won't say foundered (for your philistine here is a hopeless proposition), but closed down with a deficit because I wasn't the proprietor and was unable to knock the slipshod management into shape despite all the time I spent on it. Still less did I ever give the chap a legal guarantee. I think his account is wrong, for apart from the other moneys received, the fellow had had £7 from me for the 3 penultimate issues alone (his account covers the last 2 issues).—The 15/- for Lessner did not go through his hands but was paid direct by me.—However, I'm not going to engage in any controversy on the subject since I would thereby immediately acknowledge his right to sue me. The dirty dog will swear on oath and get one of his type-setters to swear on oath that I gave a guarantee. (Even were this the case he should have sued Biskamp first.) I shall call in Biskamp, etc., to give counter-evidence. Had I the means, I should have avoided all public proceedings, not by paying Hollinger, but by buying the debt he incurred with one Lisle, Hollinger's LANDLORD and owner of the press. Hollinger owes this man some £60 and has never paid him a FARTHING.

But circumstances being what they are, there can be no question of anything of the kind.

Unless I bring off some sort of coup—and I simply cannot see how I can do so—my position will become completely untenable. Freiligrath made another attempt at negotiating a bill. But



**[p. 502]**

articles on my affaird have been reprinted in German papers from New York to California (with the tiny little Volk we hooked the whole of the German-American press). To show you the kind of rubbish that's appearing in Germany, I enclose a cutting of the advertisements in the Vienna Presse. Il suffit" TO READ the index. (By THE BY, I am giving lectures about the first instalment to a select circle of artisans.' It seems to interest the chaps a great deal.483)

Lastly, a report on two 'great men'.367

Ad vocem* R. Schramm. Some while ago this pitiful blockhead was in Ostend, whence he sent a contribution to the Hermann.*1

Not that I'm in the habit of reading that trashy sheet; I heard about this through Freiligrath. In his contribution R. Schramm declares that one could gauge the depths to which the Germans had sunk simply by listening to their conversations on the beach. Thus he had, for instance, overheard two ladies chattering away in broad Wuppertal accents and one of them had addressed the other as 'Mrs Engels'. So that's the kind of revenge this wretch takes! But by way of retribution the blockhead recently lost £2,000 (teste' Freiligrath), having, like a fool, entered the 'precious stones business'. This had, moreover, frustrated his scheme of starting a German paper of his own in London (was to have come out this month). To the chap's intense annoyance and as a riposte to his childish MALICE, I got Biskamp to see that the FACTS—non- appearance of the paper, gem trade and loss of money—were published in the Weser-Zeitung.

Ad vocem K. Blind. With regard to this homme d'état, I must go into greater detail.

About a fortnight after my return to London from Manchester, Biskamp told me that Blind had proposed, through Hollinger, that he (i.e. Das Volk) amalgamate with Blind and company but

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 497-99. - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - c one way or another - d F. Engels, 'Karl Marx. A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy'. - e It suffices - f Marx has: Knoten. - s As to - h [C. Schramm,] 'Ostende 31. August', Hermann, No. 36, 10 September 1859 ('Vermischte Nachrichten'). - ' witness





**[p. 503]**

WELL! A few weeks ago the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung wrote to Liebknecht, who had sent them Zur Warnung. Liebknecht came to me.470 I told him to go and find Blind, and that I should await the homme d'état 'in the pub at Blind's corner'. Blind was at some resort—St. Leonard's, I think. Liebknecht wrote to him; wrote once, twice. At last a letter from the homme d'état. In the coolest and most 'diplomatic' manner the latter regretted that T should have called to see him in vain. Liebknecht, he went on, must understand that he (Blind) had no desire to intervene in the affairs of a 'paper with which he had absolutely nothing to do' and in a matter with which he had absolutely nothing to do. As for Liebknecht's allusions to 'remarks' let fall 'in the course of a private conversation', these could only be attributed to a 'complete' misunderstanding. And that, or so the 'homme d'état' imagined, was that.

[^1]: •' Marx means his reviews published in the section 'Gatherings from the Press'. - b Fidelio—the assumed name of Leonore, heroine of Beethoven's opera Fidelio.



