---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "290. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 8 October "
Page_Range: "539-541"
---

# 290. Marx to Bertalan Szemere. 8 October 



**[p. 504]**

By a series of manoeuvres which it would take too long to describe here, I further extracted the enclosed (which you must let me have back by return. I have also shown it to Freiligrath). So much for the respectable citizen's 'word of honour'!

Well, last Saturday Liebknecht sent the homme d'état a letter (modelled on a letter from myself to Liebknecht in which I had summed the matter up in somewhat forceful terms3). We are awaiting the answer and will let you know the details.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

290

London, 8 October 1859

My dear Franck,

I have received your last letter, in which you appear to suppose that, as yet, nothing has been done in the affair K. Now, this is altogether a mistake.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, „ , , . , , . „ ,. , r , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, u m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: MARX TO BERT ALAN SZEMERE478

[^4]: IN PARIS

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 486-88.





**[p. 505]**

For the case of the number of the F. P., sent to you, having been intercepted by the French Post-Office, I enclose the article above said in this letter.

2) The statement of the F. P. has been reprinted in English, Scotch and Irish provincial papers. A literal translation of it has, by friends of mine, been inserted in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung6 and the Bremer Weserzeitung. Another German transla- tion is said to have appeared in the Berlin 'Nationalzeitung'.

3) Simultaneously with your letter, I received to-day the New York Tribune d.d. September 24 which, under the title 'K. and L. N.', brings an elaborate article of mine, filling two and a half columns, and put forward in a prominent place of the paper. The Tribune having always had a faiblec for K., and P. being its London correspondent, this publication is a real success, the more so, since P. is nominally denounced in the article, and the apologetical passages of his own letter to the New Y. T.d are ridiculed. There exist at least some hundred smaller American papers, published in the English language, which receive their mot d'ordre* from the Tribune, and, consequendy, will reprint that article. The German American press, from New York to San Francisco, will, by this time, have translated the article into the Teutonic vernacular.

Moreover, it should not be forgotten that New York is the centre of the Hungarian emigration in America.

If you [should] be unable to get the Tribune d.d. Sept. 24., I shall send you the article on the condition of your remitting it, since I possess no other copy, and stand in need of it should it be replied to by P.

4) K's letter to Mac Adam,f on which the Times leader remarks, has been generally ridiculed by the London papers, so much so

[^1]: a 'One of the most remarkable results'. The Times, No. 23428, 4 October 1859. - b [K. Marx,] 'Ludwig Kossuth und Louis Napoleon', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 276, 3 October 1859 (supplement). - c weak point - d [F. Pulszky,] 'From Our Own Correspondent. Monday, August 7, 1859', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5720,23 August 1859. - c cue - f Kossuth's letter to J. M'. Adam was published in The Times, No. 23428, 4 October 1859.



