---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "291. Marx to Engels. 10 October "
Page_Range: "541-543"
---

# 291. Marx to Engels. 10 October 



**[p. 506]**

5) If you can forward me any further particulars on K's proclamations and intrigues in Hungary, they will be very welcome, and are sure to find their way into the Press.

6) My stationer was unable to get the Times' copies you ask for. Generally, some days after their issue, London Daily papers are difficult of procuring.

7) The remark on Perczel in the F. P. article is based on a public declaration of his. I thought fit to allude to it, in order to throw confusion into the ranks of K's partisans as to the source from which the information proceeds.

8) From the note enclosed, you will see that the English merchant, on further consideration, declines entering upon the wine-affair. The German, I spoke of, has returned to the Continent. Thus I see no prospect of pushing on this affair in England.

As to my brother-in-law,b I have written to him, but not yet received his answer.

Yours truly

291

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 10 October 1859

DEAR Frederick,

[^1]: Williams0

[^2]: First published in Revue d'histoire com- Reproduced from the original parée, t. IV, Nos. 1-2, 1946

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: The money arrived on Saturday and really 'saved our lives', for on that day the gang of creditors, or part of it, launched a concerted attack. MY BEST THANKS. Likewise for the manuscript.d

[^5]: a J. M' Adam, 'To the Editor of The Times', The Times, No. 23431, 7 October 1859. - b Johann Carl Juta - c conspiratorial pseudonym of Karl Marx - d F. Engels, 'Infantry'.





**[p. 507]**

Collet has sent Kossuth 5 COPIES of the last Free Press. T h e Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung has reproduced the thing.d Likewise the Weser-Zeitung. Collet came to see me yesterday. Statesman Blind had called on him and complained forcefully about his (Collet's) having failed to preserve editorial secrecy vis-à-vis myself. H e (Collet) must call on me to prevent my doing any more MISCHIEF. T h e Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung was 'A RUSSIAN (!) ORGAN', which was why he (Blind) would not hold out a helping hand to it.470 T o me, Collet said: *'At the outset, he made upon me the impression of a very sneakish fellow.' * Statesman Blind, like the gentleman he is, has not deigned to answer Liebknecht, and imagines he's been able to spike my guns through Collet. THE FOOL! At the same time he tried to get Collet to tell him who had written about Kossuth in the [Free] Press.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . . . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon' - b Marx has 'Werke' (works). - c [F. Pulszky,] 'From Our Own Correspondent. Monday, August 7, 1859', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5720, 23 August 1859. - d [K. Marx,] 'Ludwig Kossuth und Louis Napoleon', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 276 (supplement), 3 October 1859. (It was a German translation of Marx's article 'Particulars of Kossuth's Transaction with Louis Napoleon' published in The Free Press, No. 10, 28 September 1859.)



