---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "293. Engels to Marx. 28 October "
Page_Range: "544-545"
---

# 293. Engels to Marx. 28 October 



**[p. 509]**

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

293

ENGELS T O MARX 3

IN LONDON

Manchester, 28 October 1859

[] T h e Blind affair is very funny indeed; it's always a particularly agreeable spectacle when a would-be diplomatic wiseacre comes a cropper. T h e fellow could be terribly discredited as a result. Needless to say he gave his 'word of honour' simply IN THE DIPLOMATIC SENSE OF THE WORD, just as it is no insult to call someone a swine IN A PARLIAMENTARY s ENSE.b This enrichment of the language by Blind is worthy of recognition. What would be nicest of all, by the way, would be to discover that Mr Blind's 'evidence' had n o basis other than hot air which, this sinister saviour of his country being what he is, I think highly probable.

Not long ago Siebel had a letter from a ludicrous German literatusc who, for lack of money, was seeking to sell himself to the revolution and wanted him to negotiate the deal, I being supposedly the purchaser. At the same time he threatened, should the revolution refuse to buy him, to throw himself into the arms

Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Lupus is in despair over the deterioration of BITTER BEER, which is forcing him to drink PORTER and HALF AND HALF; this apart, he is keeping pretty well and is still living in Chatsworth.

[^2]: a The beginning of the letter missing; the date is at the end of the letter. - b See this volume, pp. 502-04. - c Hugo Oelbermann



