---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "296. Engels to Marx. 4 November "
Page_Range: "549-552"
---

# 296. Engels to Marx. 4 November 

Couldn't you do me an ARTICLE on the recent changes in the Prussian armya?

Regards to Lupus. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

296

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 4 November 1859

Dear Moor,

Freiligrath really deserves to be severely chastised for once and I hope that an opportunity will present itself before the Schiller nonsense is over (or its after-pains).486 Such poet's vanity and literary presumption combined with toadyism is altogether too much, and on top of that the Augsburgerb credits him with political virtue!

I suppose you read about Vogt's law-suit470 in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 297 et seq.c? The thing went quite well, but Biskamp's letter is shockingly discreditable. The fellow could

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a In compliance with this request, Engels wrote, at the end of January and beginning of February 1860, the article 'Military Reform in Germany'. - b Allgemeine Zeitung - c The Allgemeine Zeitung carried reports on the case on 25 October 1859 and on the following days.





**[p. 515]**

Volk should send the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung a testimonial, begging to be taken on as correspondent, and that this should appear in print." Vogt will make a great noise about it. Why do we always have such tactless idiots hanging round us?

But most satisfactory is the discrediting of Blind. The statement in your letterb and the document487 have now obliged the worthy diplomat to come creeping out into the open, if only to save himself being discredited still further. He has boasted about the evidence he possesses and, if he holds his tongue, will seem an unmitigated liar.

Vogt is in no less nice a mess. Case dismissed for lack of jurisdiction, ordered to pay all the costs, and referred to a jury—what can he do?

He will have to sue either the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung before a Bavarian jury—in which case he will be doomed in advance—or the Volk—and then Blind will be SUBPOENAED—or else Blind himself. In any case, it will turn out badly for him, and I don't see how he can do anything but discredit himself still more.

All this is most consoling. Garibaldi would seem to be playing a somewhat ambiguous role. A general of that ilk is in a difficult position. Once he had been forced to compound with the devil, there was no turning back. For Victor Emmanuel the obvious thing is, of course, first to exploit Garibaldi and then ruin him. Altro esempioc of how far you get with a 'practical attitude' in a revolution. It's a pity about the chap, though. Excellent, on the other hand, that Piedmont should lose its spurious character as representative of Italian unity.489

I shall do you an article about army reform in Germany when this affair has progressed a little further. Far-reaching things are happening in the sphere of military organisation, not only in Prussia but elsewhere, in Austria, etc. Everywhere the French style of uniform, etc., is being adopted, and in many respects this even means quite definitely putting the clock back. But so far everything's still rather confused; as soon as I can clarify my ideas a little I'll do the article for you.d

[^1]: I also hope that soon there'll be something further for me to report on in China and the Far East GENERALLY. Likewise Morocco.490

[^2]: a Biskamp's letter, dated 20 October 1859, was published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300, on 27 October 1859. - b to the Editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung - c Another example - d Somewhat later Engels wrote an article on the subject, entitled 'Military Reform in Germany.





**[p. 516]**

At the moment I'm deep in Ulfilas.491 It was really high time for me to polish off that damned Gothic, which I'd always been so desultory about. To my surprise I find I know far more than I thought; if only I can get hold of another reference book, I think I shall polish this off completely in a fortnight. Then I shall go on to Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon, with which I've never been on more than nodding terms. So far, I've been working without a dictionary or other reference book save the Gothic text and Grimm.0 However, that old fellow is really splendid.

What I need badly here is Grimm's Geschichte der deutschen Sprache. Could you let me have it back?

I think I shall see Lupus this evening. We are having a Schiller festival up here too (programme enclosed). Needless to say, I have nothing whatever to do with the thing. Mr Alfr. Meissner is sending a prologue, and Siebel will do the epilogue, straightforward recitation, of course, but done in proper form. In addition, this flâneur is producing a performance of 'Wallensteins Lager' d; I've been to two of the rehearsals and, if the chaps keep their nerve, it might be quite passable. The committee members are, without exception, a bunch of fools; among the public Borchardt plays at being in opposition. He's no less negatively pompous than the others are positively so, except that his negation is based on the same point of view as the position of the others, i.e. he admits that he is essentially one of their number.

Salut.

Your

F. E. Nil novi ab Ephraim Artful?c

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx arid Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: a Early in December 1859 Engels wrote the article 'Progress of the Moorish War' and later several more articles on the subject. - b as regards - c J. Grimm, Deutsche Grammatik, Th. I-IV. - d first part of Schiller's trilogy Wallenstein - e No news from Ephraim Artful (Ferdinand Lassalle)?

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



