---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "298. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 6 November "
Page_Range: "553-558"
---

# 298. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 6 November 



**[p. 518]**

For that matter, I myself am indulging in tittle-tattle, as you see, and hence it would be best for me to break off altogether. Please give my warmest regards to the girls, and do not forget Moor.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

298

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE20

IN BERLIN

London, 6 November 1859

Dear Lassalle,

You'd have had a reply from me sooner if my spare time hadn't been entirely taken up with a mass of repulsive domestic business.

1. Thank you for your good offices with Duncker.493 You're mistaken, by the by, if you think that I expected glowing tributes from the German press, or gave a rap for them. I expected to be attacked or criticised but not to be utterly ignored, which, moreover, is bound to have a serious effect on sales. Considering how vehemently these people have, at various times, railed against my communism, it was to be expected that they would now unleash their wisdom against the theoretical argument in support of the same. For after all, Germany is not without its specialised journals on economics.

In America the first instalment3 was discussed at length in the entire German press from New York to New Orleans. I only fear that it is too theoretical in tone for the working-class public there.

2. ad vocemh Vogt.

[^1]: 11 K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - b as to





**[p. 519]**

Here, in brief, is the story: Besides the Hermann, there used to be a so-called working-men's paper here, Die Neue Zeit, whose last editor was Edgar Bauer. One of his colleagues on that paper was Biskamp, who was a schoolmaster out in the country. The paper was opposed on what is called principle to the Hermann. For Edgar Bauer thought it was time he played at being a communist. I, needless to say, had nothing to do with this. Bauer wrote and told Biskamp that, in order to rid himself of a rival, Kinkel had transferred his sheet to the printer of the Neue Zeith which last, depending as it did on that printer's credit, was completely in his power. On receipt of this letter, Biskamp rushed up to London to discover, not only that Kinkel had destroyed the Neue Zeit by swapping printers, but also that Edgar Bauer, the editor of the so-called 'working-men's paper', had joined the editorial staff of the Hermann and gone over to Kinkel.

A brief note re Biskamp: He was at one time a co-publisher of the Hornisse. He edited the Bremer Tages-Chronik in company with Dulon and Ruge. In Switzerland he joined the Communist League.494 His relationship with Ruge meant that we never saw each other while he was in London. I took no notice of him, but he occasionally took notice in a polemical way of me. This man is a strange mixture of noble instincts, innate (and also physical) weakness, asceticism and idleness, Kantian moral consciousness and tactless whimsicality. His nervous irritability makes him liable to surrender any position 'on principle', to precipitate himself suddenly into the most hopeless situation, to endure it passively and stoically for a while, and then suddenly perpetrate stupidities bordering on the iniquitous. The man as I paint him here is not, of course, the man I used to know. I am painting a portrait which experience has gradually pieced together for me.

But to return to my story. Biskamp at once gave up his schoolmaster's post to take up 'the struggle of labour against capital' (i.e. Kinkel), started Das Volk without any means what- soever except subsidies from a workers' society, etc. So long as the thing lasted he was, of course, on the verge of starvation. He had secured work as correspondent to a couple of papers in Germany, but lost this as soon as his new function became known. A few

[^1]: a Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 298, 25 October 1859. - b Fidelio Hollinger





**[p. 520]**

Bohémien.

Before continuing I should point out that I have had no connection whatever with any of the public workers' associations (including the so-called communist one50) since 1851. The only workers with whom I foregather are 20-30 picked men to whom I give private lectures on political economy.483 Liebknecht, however, is chairman of the workers' society which helped Biskamp to start

Das Volk.

A few days after the birth of this paper Biskamp and Liebknecht came to see me and invited me to collaborate. At the time I declined outright, partly for want of time and partly because I was about to leave London for a longish spell.444 All I promised was to obtain a few financial contributions from friends in England, which in fact I did. On that same day I related to both of them what Blind had told me with great moral indignation the day before about Vogt, and also named my source. Biskamp used this for an article,3 as I later saw. During my absence he reprinted in Das Volk Blind's anonymous pamphlet,b which was printed by the same press as Das Volk At the same time Liebknecht sent a copy of the pamphlet to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung470 for which he supplies the English article. (As to this last circumstance, I should point out that the refugees here contribute to all papers indiscriminately. I believe myself to be the only exception to this, as I do not contribute to any German paper. Be it noted, by the by, that Palmerston, through the channel of the Prussian embassy, which in turn used Williams—the English bookseller—for its organ, has tried to get Liebknecht removed from the A. A. Z. on account of his ANTI-GOVERNMENTAL tendencies.)

After my return to London, Das Volk received from myself and Engels various contributions wholly unrelated to the affaire Vogt. Apart from a few attacks on Schleinitz's diplomatic circulars/ all I supplied was a humorous comment or two on Kinkel's aesthetic dissertations in the Hermann, viewed from a grammatical stand- point.*1 Life here in London is too tough for one not to indulge in distractions of this kind every 8 years or so.

[^1]: a [E. Biskamp,] 'Der Reichsregenf, Dos Volk, No. 2, 14 May 1859. - b [K. Blind,] 'Warnung zur gefälligen Verbreitung', Dos Volk, No. 7, 18 June 1859. - c Schleinitz's despatches to the Prussian embassies in Britain, Russia and Germany (Berlin, June-July 1859) were reported in the Neue Preußische Zeitung, No. 170, 24 July ('Zu der "Vermittlung"'), No. 171, 26 July ('Preußische Depeschen'), No. 174, 29 July 1859 ('Deutschland'). - d Marx refers to his series of articles Quid pro quo and his reviews published in the section 'Gatherings from the Press'.



The paper came to a sudden end, mainly for lack of money. Biskamp, besides being wholly without means of subsistence, contracted a painful disease and had to go into the German hospital. When he was discharged he must literally have starved to death if I hadn't taken care of him. During this period he wrote to several German papers in the hope of becoming their correspon- dent, but to no effect. Then he got a letter from the editorial board of the A. A. Z., whereupon he wrote them that shockingly discreditable epistle—behind the backs of his friends, of course.1* Naturally he believed he was writing a private letter. The idiot is now overcome with contrition and for a couple of days has neither eaten nor slept. I don't know what will become of him. If I have told you all this at some length, it is not in order to justify the man's behaviour, but to explain it. If he were so venal a fellow as most of the 'democrats' here, he wouldn't have precipitated himself into a situation which he hadn't the strength to endure.

As to my statement in the A. A. Z.,b the circumstances are as follows:

As you know, Blind published his denunciation of Vogt. At the same time an anonymous article by himc appeared in the London Free Press (Urquhart's PAPER), containing much the same informa- tion—I enclose the article with this letter—but omitting Vogt's name and sundry other particulars.440 Now when Vogt brought his action against the A. A. Z., and the latter appealed to Liebknecht, he, being responsible to the A. A. Z., naturally appealed to me and I to Blind. The latter refused to answer for his statements. It was all due to a misunderstanding, he said. The whole thing had nothing to do with him. He even went so far as to give his word of honour that he had had nothing to do with the anonymous pamphlet. Repeated requests were of no avail. This conduct was all the more infamous in that the worthy fellow knew that Vogt was citing me—privately in London and publicly in Switzerland— as the source of the denunciation so as to represent the whole thing as deriving from the malicious ill-will borne by the communist towards the 'eminent democrat' and 'ex-imperial regent'410 I therefore began by turning to Collet, who made no bones about stating that Blind had written the article in The Free Press. Next, I obtained a statement from the type-setterd who had set the type for the pamphlet.487 Blind's duplicity called for

[^1]: a E. Biskamp, [Letter to the Editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung, dated 20 October 1859,] Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300, 27 October 1859. - b K. Marx, [Letter to the Editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung]. - c [K. Blind,] 'The Grand Duke Constantine to Be King of Hungary', The Free Press, No. 5, 27 May 1859. - <* A. Vögele

[^2]: 18-194





**[p. 522]**

I shall now have the whole of Germany's vulgar democracy about my ears, and Biskamp's folly will make this all the easier for them. Needless to say, it would never occur to me to skirmish in insignificant journals with all these insignificant scoundrels. However, I believe it necessary to make an example of one of them, namely Mr Eduard Meyen of the Freischütz,' pour encourager les autres}1 I'm sending one copy to the A. A. Z., one to the Reform" in Hamburg and I'd like the copy I sent you to appear in a Berlin paper.

I must save up my exposé of the Italian war,485 an affair upon which I have in no way changed my views, for my next letterd

(shortly).

Salut.

Your

K. M.

P.S. Much as I detest alluding to this point, my financial affairs are in a dangerously critical state—so much so that I can hardly find time for my articles for the Tribune, let alone the political economy.473 Admittedly I shall be receiving over £40 in 8 to 10 weeks' time. But for me the essential and crucial point is to anticipate its receipt. Can you help me with a bill transaction towards that end? In 8, or at most 10, weeks' time I shall be good for £50.

[^1]: First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin 1922 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a E. Meyen, 'Der Proceß Carl Vogt's gegen die Augsburger Allg. Ztg.', Der Freischütz, No. 132, 3 November 1859. - b to encourage the others - c K. Marx, 'Statement to the Editors of Die Reform, the Volks-Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung. - d See this volume, pp. 536-39.



