---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "299. Marx to Engels. 7 November "
Page_Range: "558-559"
---

# 299. Marx to Engels. 7 November 



**[p. 11]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 7 November 1859

Dear Engels,

I shall send you the Grimm.a

I have not written anything yet about Morocco,490 or about the Caucasus,495 or any military stuff on Asia. I have no diplomatic particulars about Morocco, so you will have to pick up your pen again. My circumstances are such as to preclude my doing sufficient work on the 2nd instalment, which I regard as of crucial importance.473 It does, in fact, contain the pith of all the bourgeois stuff.

Biskamp's letterb is infinitely discreditable; in view of his situation one can explain but not excuse it. The whole of vulgar democracy is seeking to hush up the Blind affair in the German press while assailing me. E.g. Mr Meyen, present editor of the Freischütz." I have now sent a sharply-worded statement to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung and the Reform in Hamburg.*1 I shall bring Vogt and Blind face to face even if it has to be done at gun point.

In a couple of lines in the Tribune the wretched Pulszky dismisses my lettere as emanating from the camp of the 'CRACKED' Urquhart.£ The fellows dare not open their traps. For they don't know what kind of evidence we have at our disposal. For Kossuth, or so Szemere wrote and told me, secretly decamped after the treaty of Villafranca without a word to Klapka and the other officers. For he was afraid of being handed over to the

[^1]: a J. Grimm, Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, Bd. 1-2. - b E. Biskamp, [Letter to the Editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung, 20 October 1859,] Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300, 27 October 1859. - c [E. Meyen,] 'Der Proceß Carl Vogt's gegen die Augsburger Allg. Ztg.', Der Freischütz, No. 132, 3 November 1859. - d K. Marx, 'Statement to the Editors of Die Reform, the Volks-Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung'. - e K. Marx, 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon'. - ' Marx refers to Pulszky's report of October 1859 published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5775, 26 October 1859.

[^2]: 18*



