---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "300. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 14 November "
Page_Range: "559-561"
---

# 300. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 14 November 



**[p. 524]**

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published m English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, time i Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

300

MARX T O FERDINAND LASSALLE20

IN BERLIN

London, 14 November 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

I am answering your by return. It isn't a question of your finding the money, but of a bill transaction. Would you allow me to draw on you at 3 months? // so you would be provided with security (guaranteed not only by myself, but also by Engels) before the bill fell due. It's a question, therefore, of an accommodation bill or, to put it more crudely, kite-flying. It still remains very doubtful, of course, whether I could manage to negotiate a bill of this kind over here. However there might be some CHANCE of it. Engels would have procured what was necessary had not all his liquid assets been tied up as a result of an action for causing bodily harm to an Englishman.3 The affair is costing more than £100 and accommodation bills drawn in London on Manchester are only possible between businessmen.

Assuming the Reform and the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung accept it, it would arrive too late in Berlin/ Assuming they don't accept it, it will in any case be too late for any consideration of the great Meyen's article,*1 which will by then be outdated.

[^1]: I think it is now too late to insert the anti-Meyen statement.b

[^2]: a Daniells. See this volume, p. 490. - b K. Marx, 'Statement to the Editors of Die Reform, the Volks-Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung'. - c i.e. the editorial office of the Volks-Zeitung - d [E. Meyen,] 'Der Proceß Carl Vogt's gegen die Augsburger Allg. Ztg.', Der Freischütz, No. 132, 3 November 1859.





**[p. 525]**

Das Volk instead of the A. Z., Blind, etc., would have been legally compelled to give evidence on oath and the matter would have been bound to come to light. Finally, it was one thing to break a lance with a revolutionary paper direct, and quite another to do so with the reactionary A. Z. The way in which the 'noble' Vogt (Vogt the 'well-rounded', as his barrister described him,498 is rather more TO THE POINT) attacked me in the Biel Handels-Courier* rejoiced my heart. I am, it seems, in communication with 'the police', live off the workers, and such-like inanities.

in the Tribune and shall let you have it as soon as he returns me the cutting from Paris. The nicest part of it is that Kossuth's agent, Pulszky, is the Tribune's London correspondent.

The Schiller festival here was a Kinkel festival.486 Freiligrath himself, who took part in it despite my warning, now realises that Gottfried used him simply as a tool. He told me that Kinkel's melodramatic speech was a veritable farce which literally had to be seen to be believed. You'd laugh heartily were I to tell you what

[^1]: As to Kossuth, all the particulars about his transaction with Bonaparte were provided by Szemere (formerly Hungarian Prime Minister, presently in Paris).479 I sent him my anti-Kossuth articleb

[^2]: a [K. Vogt,] 'Zur Warnung', Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150 (supplement), 2 June 1859. The article was reprinted, with editorial comments, in Das Volk, No. 6, 11 June 1859. - b K. Marx, 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon'.



