---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "301. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle, 15 November "
Page_Range: "561-562"
---

# 301. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle, 15 November 



**[p. 1922]**

N. Rh. Z. Gottfried invariably figured in the press with a travelling-bag for attribute. Later on, it was a musket, then a lyre, then a distaff. Now our parson never does so without a black, red and gold flag.499 The so-called 'working men' whom he has gathered round him belong to a guild; article 1 of the rules of their society runs: 'In accordance with the rules, all politics are to be excluded from the society's debates.' Before 1848 these same fellows enjoyed Bunsen's patronage.

Well, enough of gossip, for this note was simply intended to be de re pecuniaria*

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. Ill, Stutt- „ , . . _ ,. , . . „ r R rli 1922 Published in English m lull lor the ^ (tret tl m ö first time

301

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

[London,] 15 November 1859 Dear Lassalle,

Could you possibly get the Volks-Zeitung to publish the following replyc to Blind's declaration in No. 313 of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung} If so, please send me 2 COPIES of it. En passant, I would draw your attention to the hymn of self-adulation struck up by Gottfried Kinkel in the latest Hermann6 to the accompaniment of general rejoicing on the part of the Germans in London. In haste.

Your

[^1]: IN BERLIN

[^2]: K. M. First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. Ill, Stutt- . .. , i . •• • r . eart-Berlin Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 511-12. - b about financial matters - c K. Marx, 'Declara- tion'. - d 'Das Schillerfest in London', Herr&ann, No. 45, 12 November 1859.



