---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "302. Marx to Engels. 16 November "
Page_Range: "562-563"
---

# 302. Marx to Engels. 16 November 



**[p. 302]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 16 November 1859

Dear Engels,

I hope that a Morocco will arrive from you on Friday.3 Apart from everything else, this is the time of the presidential elections, and in any case I fear that restrictions will again be put on the quantity of articles to be delivered. This fate will befall me all the sooner if, given the present shortage of material, I don't write about THEMES like this that interest the fellows.

You must also write something for me, PRIVATELY, OF COURSE, not for the Tribune, about the Schiller tomfoolery in Manchester. In my next I shall tell you about the Kinkel festival down here. Just now Freiligrath is deeply resentful of Gottfried. Meanwhile you should read the latest number of the Hermann^ and see with your own eyes how 'Parson Charming' drools over himself.

The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung has not, it seems, accepted my declaration because it was apparently rendered superfluous by the one sent to them by Blind.c I have now sent them an answer to this slyboots from Baden with a positive demand—for I refer at the same time to the letters they wrote med—that they print my answer/

Salut

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, „ , , . , , . „ , . , r Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a At the beginning of December Engels wrote the article 'Progress of the Moorish War'. - b 'Das Schillerfest in London', Hermann, No. 45, 12 November 1859. - c K. Blind, 'Erklärung', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 313, 9 November 1859. - d See this volume, p. 508. - e The Allgemeine Zeitung did publish Marx's 'Declaration' in its issue No. 325 (supplement), 21 November 1859.



