---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "303. Engels to Emil Engels. 16 November "
Page_Range: "563-564"
---

# 303. Engels to Emil Engels. 16 November 



**[p. 303]**

ENGELS TO EMIL ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

Manchester, 16 November 1859

Dear Emil,

Our procedure and method of adjustment are simply as follows: The rollers are removed and the yarn laid over them, after which they are replaced; the upper roller is then moved upwards by means of screws (one at either end of the machine) until there is sufficient tension on the yarn.

1. The rollers are made of iron with rectangular pegs at the ends which fit into rectangular apertures (in the axle). This, however, applies only to the lower roller, which is rotated by the machine; the upper one rests in a simple socket and runs automatically with the other.

2. As already said, the screws are at either end of the upper roller and are tightened by the machine, not by hand.

3. The brushing cylinder has fixed mountings for its axle so as to ensure that it is in the right position immediately the yarn is in place and tightened. For all but the very fine counts we now have cylinders clothed alternately with brushes and wooden slats which rub against the yarn.

4. Your final question—how the connection is effected between the roller one inserts and the part that rotates—is not clear to me; however I think it has already been answered under 1.

It's impossible for me to make you a sketch of the machine, as I can't describe the wheels from memory. But you'll have no difficulty in making one of your own, since to the best of my knowledge all the essential parts correspond exactly to yours, and we use the same machine both for coarse and fine counts, altering the PULLEYS, if anything, in order to reduce the speed. For normal use the average diameter of the PULLEYS for the brushes is 20 inches and for the rollers 14 inches, the speed of the shaft being 163.90 revolutions per minute. For really fine counts we increase the diameter of the PULLEY for the rollers to 18 inches. The screws are driven by an -OPEN AND CROSS STRAF.

Our machines are made partly by ourselves, partly by Wren & Hopkinson; you wouldn't be able to buy a complete machine or individual parts over here unless you approached G. Ermen.

