---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "305. Engels to Marx. 17 November "
Page_Range: "565-567"
---

# 305. Engels to Marx. 17 November 



**[p. 305]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 November 1859

Dear Moor,

As though it wasn't enough to be saddled with a Russian, I have a Genevan arriving today, and Ermen shows an increasing tendency to foist onto me the onerous side of representing the firm. Nevertheless I still had hopes this morning of finding time for an article, but it proved utterly impossible. Next Tuesday, however, you will get an article on Morocco,3 you may be sure of that. This will be followed as soon as possible by more on the RIFLE VOLUNTEER MOVEMENT,502 Prussian army reformb and diverse other matters.

The business of the ASSAULT has been settled/ Thirty pounds damages and twenty-five costs. It's been paid-^partly by borrow- ing. The action was brought in London and, quite apart from the scandal up here, the publication in the German papers of The Times report of the affair would have been a nice juicy titbit for Kinkel & Co.

Schiller festival. Programme enclosed, likewise the original poetical creations consisting, as you will observe, of

Prologue by Meissner, Catalogue by Samelson, Epilogue by Siebel.

Pro- and epi- only saved by the antithesis of the catalogue. The first part went OFF in a resounding failure. Dr Marcus (bankrupt woollen merchant with an Erlangend doctorate à 66 talers, 20 silver groschen) read the committee's report in a lachrymose voice, Siebel declaimed the prologue passably well, but indistinctly, Theodores spoke flowery nonsense very indistinctly indeed, all that one could hear being rrrrrr—the choir sang splendidly—Morell delivered himself of platitudes in English, but audibly and fluently—'Die Kraniche des Ibykus'e sent the entire

[^1]: a At the beginning of December Engels wrote the article 'Progress of the Moorish War'. - b F. Engels, 'Military Reform in Germany'. - c See this volume, p. 490. - d University town in Bavaria - e a poem by Schiller





**[p. 531]**

Now they propose to found a Schiller Institute492 with the surplus, the surplus, however, being a deficit of £150!

On Saturday a festive guzzle which I didn't attend. Numerous toasts and readings of all the REJECTED ADDRESSES

On Friday night the singers and actors went on carousing until four o'clock in the morning—a very merry affair.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: What is all this about a brawl at the Crystal Palace503?

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a F. Schiller, 'Die unüberwindliche Flotte'. - b F. Schiller, Wallensteins Lager—first part of the trilogy Wallenstein.



