---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "306. Marx to Engels. 19 November "
Page_Range: "567-571"
---

# 306. Marx to Engels. 19 November 



**[p. 306]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 November 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

Today I'm sending you all sorts of curious things: 1. a letter3

from philistine Freiligrath to me; 2. a letter from Orges (of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung) to Biskamp; 3. an issue (No. 43) of the Gartenlaube^ published in Leipzig, and 4. a letter from Imandt to me together with a cutting from the Trier Volksblatt504 Finally, I would advise you to buy .today's Hermann as it contains the story, devised by Mr Beta, of the Schiller festival here and casts a strange light on the conduct of our friend Freiligrath.c

Before going into these matters and in case I forget, I would mention that the Hungarians in New York, Chicago, New Orleans, etc., have held meetings at which they resolved to send Kossuth a letter suggesting he vindicate himself with reference to my article in the New-York Tribune.d Otherwise they would renounce their ALLEGIANCE to him. I don't know whether I have told you about the latest news I have received from Szemere.e D'abord,1 that after the peace of Villafranca, Kossuth decamped from Italy without a word to his officers, amongst whom Klapka. Kossuth was afraid Bonaparte would hand him over to Francis Joseph.496 Originally, so Szemere now writes, this same worthy had not been included in the Bonaparte business. Klapka, Kiss and Teleki had, off their own bat, agreed with Plon-Plon to instigate a revolution in Hungary. Kossuth got wind of it and, from London, threatened to denounce them in the English press should they not include him in the compact. SUCH ARE THOSE WORTHIES.

In some ways I envy you for being able to live in Manchester, cut off as you are from the war between mice and frogs.505 Down here I have to wade through all this ordure and do so in circumstances which already consume too much of the time I

[^1]: a dated 17 November 1859 - b containing H. Beta's article 'Ferdinand Freiligrath' - c [H.] B[eta,] 'Chronik unseres Schillerfestes', Hermann, No. 46, 19 November 1859. - d 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon' - e See this volume, p. 523. - f First





**[p. 533]**

d'affaires—in the matter of the great Kinkel-Freiligrath controver- sy—on the organising committee for the Schiller festival. At that festival the Blind and Freiligrath families sat cheek by jowl throughout the performance. Well, on the following morning3 The Morning Advertiser carried a report in which Freiligrath's poem was described as 'ABOVE MEDIOCRITY'b. The same critical sense (whereof, indeed, not much is needed to strip student Blind of his mask of anonymity) which told me that Blind, and Blind alone, had written the anti-Vogt paragraph in The Free Press,c also told me that he was the author of this article. The only thing which surprised me was that the obsequious sycophant had had the courage to speak about Freiligrath IN THIS COOL MANNER. I sent the latter thé cutting. Whereupon I received from him the enclosed letter which, if one reads between the lines, more or less voices the suspicion that J was responsible for introducing a forgery into student Blind's EXERCISE—namely, the quip about Freiligrath. On Saturday I went to see Freiligrath. I didn't yet know about the statement he had made in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung (to wit, that he was not one of Vogt's accusers, nor had he ever written a line for the 'Volk').d He was careful, too, not to breathe a word to me about it. I told him de prime aborde that I thought it by no means a crime on Blind's part to consider Freiligrath's poem as 'ABOVE MEDIOCRITY', for this was an aesthetic judgment; but that it did seem to me altogether too much when he allowed Blind to bamboozle him into thinking I had amended Blind's task for him—through some mysterious third party—and interpolated the quip about himself (Freiligrath). Greatly embarrassed, the philis- tine now admitted, d'abord,* that he had shown Blind my letter, and proceeded to show me the two letters from Blind. In the first, student Blind describes a person frequently seen near me at the Urquhartite meeting of 9 May420 and who had skulked round him

[^1]: a 11 November 1859 - b 'Crystal Palace.—The Schiller Commemoration', The Morning Advertiser, No. 21344, 11 November 1859. - <= [K. Blind,] T h e Grand Duke Constantine to Be King of Hungary', The Free Press, No. 5, 27 May 1859. - d F. Freiligrath, 'Erklärung', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 319 (supplement), 15 November 1859. - e to begin with - f first



This whole business is so rotten—tortuous—and so typical of philistines Freiligrath and Blind that I had to go into this nonsense at some length. It's altogether typical of philistine Freiligrath that he should not deem himself accountable to me for his appearance in public with Kinkel and Co., for his statement in the Augsburg

Allgemeine Zeitung, for his coquetry with the Hermann, for his intercourse with Blind at a time when he knew about that scoundrel's 'word of honour',b etc.—but believes that everything should revolve round somebody's having had the audacity to find his poem (I enclose it) ABOVE MEDIOCRITY' instead of crying it up AS THE

I told him I didn't give a fig for that affair, compared with which there were far more important things at stake between myself and Blind, etc.

As for the 'machinations' against him on the part of Kinkel, etc., he had only himself to blame. Why demean himself with the fellows?

Finally I wanted to know what was contained in No. 43 of the Gartenlaube.'' It then transpired that Mr Freiligrath was on very

[^1]: VERY INCARNATION OF THE BEAUTIFUL AND SUBLIME.

[^2]: a by Kinkel (see this volume, pp. 512-13) - b See this volume, pp. 502-04. - c It contained Beta's article 'Ferdinand Freiligrath'.





**[p. 535]**

Nevertheless, I cannot and dare not risk any kind of éclatd with the fellow. He sees to my bills on the Tribune, something I'm bound to regard as a favour (although the standing thus gained with Bischoffsheim is to his advantage, not mine). Otherwise I should

[^1]: a Gottfried Kinkel - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - <-' Kätche, Freiligrath's daughter - d row



