---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "307. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 22 November "
Page_Range: "571-574"
---

# 307. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 22 November 



**[p. 536]**

Freiligrath)—more than that this row should take place. If only for that reason it shouldn't be allowed to happen just now. However, it will be hard for me to take all these slights lying down.

About the happenings at the Crystal Palace and subsequently on the Schiller committee in my next.

Salut ., Your

K. M. Another thing you should note in the latest rotten Hermann is the way Mr Blind commends himself as a prophet.3

The UPSHOT of all the Hermann's revelations from Berlin re Stieber is that Duncker, the old policeman, is again trying to take the place of Stieber, his rival and enemy (since 1848).b Moreover, in the last issue but one of the Hermann, the reinstatement of Police Superintendent Duncker was declared by the Berlin correspon- dent to be the true aim of modern world history.0

307

[London,] 22 November 1859

Dear Lassalle,

For one thing today is mailing day for Americad; for another I have taken medicine. So writing is difficult either way. Hence I shall be quite brief.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- ,.K. Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, , , ,. , . . r. Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published m English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, u m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE506

[^4]: IN BERLIN

[^5]: a [Blind,] 'Prognostikon des wahrscheinlichen Verlaufes des italienischen Krieges; geschrieben kurz vor Ausbruch desselben', Hermann, No. 46, 19 November

[^6]: 1859. - b [K. W. Eichhoff,] 'Stieber', Hermann, Nos. 36-38, 40, 42, 43; 10, 17, 24 September, 8, 22, 29 October 1859. - c [K. W. Eichhoff,] 'Berlin, 8. Nov. (Stieber)',

[^7]: Hermann, No. 45, 12 November 1859. - d It was a Tuesday. On Tuesdays and Fridays Marx sent off articles for the New-York Daily Tribune.





**[p. 537]**

2. You had best abandon your anti-Vogt statement now that the Reform has already printed a statement of mine.3 My chief concern now is to compel Mr Vogt to pursue the matter in London.b

3. I have told Freiligrath that you have praised his poem on Schiller and criticised his conduct towards you.507 He will now write to you. Read No. 43 of the Gartenlaube wherein Kinkel's sycophant, Mr Beta (sometime editor of the How do you do? published here by Louis Drucker, and presently faiseur-en-chefc of the Hermann, whose EDITORS are all recruited from the literary

Lumpenproletariat), makes the discovery that Freiligrath 'seldom sang any more' after he had been 'inspired' by me.d During recent years Freiligrath has been whoring too much after the idols of Babylon, so great is his thirst for popularity. His wife may not be an altogether beneficent influence IN THIS RESPECT. I will dilate no further on this theme, except to say that I show more considera- tion for old personal and party friends than seems right to many very clever people in our party.

4. Ad vocem' Bonaparte. So far as I can see, the Italian war370

has temporarily strengthened Bonaparte's position in France; betrayed the Italian revolution into the hands of the Piedmontese doctrinaires and their henchmen; made Prussia exceptionally popular with the liberal vulgus( by virtue of her Haugwitzian policy; increased Russia's influence in Germany; and, finally, propagated demoralisation of an unprecedented kind—a most repulsive combination of Bonapartism and drivel about nationalities. I for my part fail to see any reason why members of our party had to give dialectical support to these nauseous, counter-revolutionary illusions of philistine-liberal provenance. It is my belief that, from the moment when Disraeli publicly admitted the existence of an alliance between Bonaparte and Russia,415 and more especially from the moment when Russia sent out her shameless circular note to the German courts,* the battle-cry should have been raised against the .Russo-French

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Statement to the Editors of Die Reform, the Volks-Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung'. - b See this volume, p. 525. - c chief impresario - d [H.] B[eta,] 'Ferdinand Freiligrath', Die Gartenlaube, No. 43, 1859. - e As to - f common people - 8 A. Gortschakoff, 'Circularschreiben an die russischen Gesandtschaften vom 15 (27) Mai 1859', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 167, 16 June 1859.





**[p. 538]**

Schleinitz's despatches,3 which I have studied in detail, together with the statements made by the ministers over here, some direct to Parliament, some in the press, confirm my view that Prussia had no intention of intervening so long as the German frontier was not violated. Bonaparte, as the protégé of Russia and England, had at the time been given permission to conduct a 'localised' war in order to keep him in France. Prussia would not have dared lift a finger and, had she done so, there would have been war between Germany and Russia, than which nothing could be more desirable. But IN FACT there was no question of it, because Prussia would never have had the courage to take such a step. Rather it was a question, partly of exposing the Prussian government in all its miserable weakness, partly and above all of unmasking Bonapartist DELUSIONS. Nor would the game have been too difficult, since all the representatives of the revolutionary party from Mazzini to Louis Blanc, Ledru-Rollin and even Proudhon would have joined in. This would have meant that the polemic against Bonaparte's imposture could not have acquired the appearance of hostility to Italy or France.

I am not, of course, going into the matter thoroughly here, but merely jotting down a few points. However, I shall, with your permission, make one further observation. There is a possibility that things will come to a head again soon. In that case one of two things must prevail in our party: either no one speaks for the party without prior consultation with the others, or everyone has the right to put forward his views without any regard for the others. Now this last is certainly not to be recommended, since a public polemic would in no way benefit so small a party (which, I hope, makes up in vigour for what it lacks in numbers). I can only say that, during my travels through England and Scotland (this summer)444—for our old party friends are scattered about the country—I did not find anybody here who would not have wished you had modified your pamphlet6 in many respects. I see a quite simple explanation for this, namely that foreign policy, in

[^1]: a to the Prussian embassies in Britain, Russia and Germany (Berlin, June-July 1859); reports on the despatches appeared in the Neue Preußische Zeitung, No. 170, 24 July 1859 ('Zu der "Vermittlung"'), No. 171, 26 July ('Preußische Depeschen') and No. 174, 29 July 1859 ('Deutschland'). See also p. 520 - b F. Lassalle, Der italienische Krieg und die Aufgabe Preußens.



