---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "310. Engels to Marx. 28 November "
Page_Range: "579-581"
---

# 310. Engels to Marx. 28 November 

Enough of this rubbish. Yesterday a Tory journalist told me it was his intention to provide evidence next week in a TORY WEEKLY (the WEEKLY MAIL, I THINK) to the effect that Garibaldi was receiving money from Bonaparte while still a merchant in South America. Nous verrons.c

Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

Apropos. In my article in the Tribune* yesterday I said that I would shortly be writing about the RIFLE MOVEMENT over here. So I should be glad if you would write about it.502

310

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 28 November 1859 7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

If I didn't write last week it was because I had given Lupus all the papers; nor did I recover them for several days having, in the

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, „ , , . , • • T. ,., r . ••• Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Pubhshed m Enghsh for the first Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, U m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a [K. Blind,] 'The Grand Duke Constantine to Be King of Hungary', The Free Press, No. 5, 27 May 1859. - b incriminating evidence - c We shall see. - d K. Marx, 'The Invasion Panic in England'.





**[p. 545]**

Your 'Declaration' in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung" will put Blind into a very nasty position. How, without discrediting himself, he will lie his way out of the pass his lies have brought him to, I fail to see.

These shabby goings-on must indeed be a sore trial to your wife. However, this rubbish, too, will pass and, I hope, soon. Within a few weeks it will no doubt be possible to drop Mr Freiligrath and

[^1]: a if possible - b F. Freiligrath, 'Erklärung', Altgemeine Zeitung, No. 319 (supple- ment), 15 November 1859. - c Ida Freiligrath — d Probably an allusion to Nicolas Chamfort's dictum: 'Celebrity: the advantage of being known by those who don't know you7 (Maximes et Pensées). - e K. Marx, 'Declaration'.



