---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "311. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. About 30 November "
Page_Range: "581-582"
---

# 311. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. About 30 November 

W a r m regards to your wife and the YOUNG LADIES.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, , ,. , r , .. Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, ü m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

311

MARX T O FERDINAND FREILIGRATH 5 1 4

IN LONDON

[London, about 30 November 1859]

Dear Freiligrath,

I am neither Liebknecht's letter-writer, nor his ATTORNEY. I shall, however, send him a copy of that part of your letter which relates to him.

I have decided against the statement I had briefly envisaged, bearing in mind that 'odi profanum vulgus et arceo'." While the statement was certainly against Beta, it was for that very reason bound to be also about you, as you will have seen from the SUMMARY. If only for that reason, I gave you notice of it, quite apart from the intimacy in which your family and his appear in his opu$culum.h

You find it unpleasant to have your name mixed u p in the Vogt affair. I don't give a d a m n for Vogt and his infamous lies in the Biel Handels-Courier,c but I will not have my name used as a mask by democratic tricksters. As you know, if someone is forced to call upon witnesses, no other person can 'object' to being cited as a witness. In accordance with ancient English legal USE, RESTIVE WITNESSES may, horribile dictu,d actually be crushed to death.

[^1]: a I loathe the profane rabble and shun it (Horace, Odes, III, I, 1). - b [H.] B[eta,] 'Ferdinand Freiligrath', Die Gartenlaube, No. 43, 1859. - c [K. Vogt,] 'Zur Warnung', Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150 (supplement), 2 June 1859. - A horrible to say



