---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "312. Marx to Engels. 10 December "
Page_Range: "582-585"
---

# 312. Marx to Engels. 10 December 



**[p. 547]**

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Die Neue Zeit, Ergän- Printed according to the manu- zungshefte, No. 12, 1911-1912 script of Marx's letter to Engels of

10 December 1859

Published in English for the first time

312

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 10 December 1859

Dear Engels,

Article received." I trust your health has improved. As to the Freiligrath business, more in the course of this letter. I presume you saw the Hermann of a week ago today containing 'Vorletzte Sitzung des Schiller-Comités',b a self-portrait of the scoundrelly bunch of lumpenproletariaris which has gathered round Gottfried Kinkel. The article was written by the worthy Beta.

What do you make of Mr Lassalle's notifying me ALL AT ONCE of his 'Political Economy'.278 Does this not explain why my work0 was, firstly, so much delayed and, secondly, so badly advertised? Lassalle lives in Duncker's house, or so I am told by Fischel of Berlin (was in England for a few days; editor of the Berlin Portfolio492— Urquhartite—of which Nos. 1 and 2 contain excerpts from my anti-Palmerston PAMPHLETS on Poland and Unkiar-Skelessid). In

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'Progress of the Moorish War'. - b Hermann, No. 48, 3 December 1859. - c A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy- d K. Marx, 'Der "wahrhaft" englische Minister und Russland am Bosporus' and 'Lord Palmerston und die polnische Insurrection. 1831' (excerpts from the pamphlet Lord Palmerston), Dos

[^2]: Neue Portfolio, Berlin, 1859, Heft I; 1860, Heft II.





**[p. 548]**

I wrote and asked Lassalle whether he might not be able to get hold of some money for me (against a bill on myself which I would give him).b He replied saying that he himself was living on credit until July, and had appropriated Duncker's FLOATING SURPLUS. Then he suggested I draw a bill on him (Lassalle), discount it here, and send him the money before it fell due. But over here the name of Lassalle is not, of course, worth Vioo of a FARTHING. I have latterly been cited at the COUNTY COURT by sundry fellows— quite small ones, such as the MILKMAN, etc., and can, in fact, see no way out of the crisis which has grown steadily worse for the past half year. Extra expenses, e.g. ABOUT £5 for the rotten Volk lawsuit, and Mr Biskamp, whom I have fed for three months (and am not yet quit of), have, indeed, contributed their mite to the predicament. But all in all that made little odds. What is really devilish is not having a Bamberger here in London any more, for there are at present considerable possibilities in regard to bill transactions. Had fat philistine Freiligrath so wished, he might even have procured me a LOAN, for after all the philistine had the security to hand. But the fellow imagined (and no doubt actually boasted) that he was doing a great deal if, a week before I drew a bill on the Tribune, he loaned me £2 for a week. I have, by the by, made various other attempts to find a usurer. BUTTILLNOWWITHOUTANY

I know that you yourself are in a fix as a result of being taken to court recently,0 and hence am telling you about the STATE OF THINGS only because I feel a need to discuss it with SOMEBODY. I hope that our domestic misfortunes won't deter you from coming up here for a few days. It's absolutely essential for my girls to have a 'human being' in the house again for once. The poor children have been too early tormented by domestic misery. Now ad vocemd Freiligrath.

Having waited a week, the philistine wrote the following letter:

[^1]: RESULT.

[^2]: 'Dear Marx, 'I have received your letter of the 23 inst.' (November)e 'and Liebknecht's of the same date and, in order to simplify matters, am replying to both in this letter to you.

[^3]: * See this volume, p. 319. - •> Ibid., p. 524. - c Ibid., pp. 490, 493, 499, 530. - d as to - c See this volume, pp. 539-40.





**[p. 549]**

'That's all about and for Liebknecht! 'And now for your letter. 'I gladly allow your objection to the word "conceded" used in my letter to Liebknecht (of 21 November). I set no store by that word. Nor did it conceal any implication of any kind, and I might just as well have used "remarked" or "said". So without further contention I concede your "conceded". If we were both of the same opinion from the start, so much the better!'

(The slyboots doesn't tumble to the fact that he is thereby conceding wry opinion of Vogt and Blind.)

'As regards your anti-Beta statement you must, of course, do exactly as you think fit. All the same, I believe that your first impulse to ignore the thing was the better one and more worthy of you! Now that you have had more than twice 24 hours for deliberation, you will have decided one way or the other. Whether this way or that is quite immaterial to me!

'That you should have wished to inform me beforehand, "as is fitting between friends", of your anti-Beta statement is most deserving of thanks. For that matter your statement, so far as I can see, was to be directed against Beta, not against myself, and hence scarcely called for prior notification of your intention

[^1]: 'At all events let me not omit to mention en revanche that I myself shall probably be publishing another statement in which I shall repeat, once and for all, that I object to the use of my name in connection with the Vogt affair.

[^2]: Your

[^3]: F. Freiligrath.'

[^4]: UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES I could, of course, only reply IN A VERY MODERATE TONE to this letter, 'malicious' in intent and adorned with so many!! I therefore wrote by return:

[^5]: 'Dear Freiligrath,0

[^6]: 'I am neither Liebknecht's letter-writer, nor his ATTORNEY. I shall, however, send him a copy of that part of your letter which relates to him.

[^7]: 'I have decided against the statement I had briefly envisaged, bearing in mind that "odi profanum valgus et arceo".d

[^8]: 'While the statement was certainly against Beta, it was for that very reason b o u n d to be also about you, as you will have seen from the SUMMARY. If only for that reason, I gave you notice of it, quite

[^9]: a [W. Liebknecht,] 'Erklärung', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 327 (supplement), 23 November 1859. - b by way of a return - c See this volume, p. 546. - d I loathe the profane rabble and shun it (Horace, Odes, III, I, 1).



