---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "313. Engels to Marx. 11 or 12 December "
Page_Range: "585-586"
---

# 313. Engels to Marx. 11 or 12 December 

'You find it unpleasant to have your name mixed up in the Vogt affair. I don't give a damn for Vogt and his infamous lies in the Biel Handels-Courier,b but I will not have my name used as a mask by democratic tricksters. As you know, if someone is forced to call upon witnesses, no other person can "object" tö being cited as a witness. In accordance with ancient English legal USE, RESTIVE WITNESSES may, horribile aictu,c actually be crushed to death.

'Finally, as regards party considerations, I am used to being treated on behalf of the whole party as target for mud-slinging by the press, and to seeing my private interests constantly damaged by party considerations; on the other hand, I am equally used to being unable to reckon on any kind of private consideration towards myself.

'Salut.

Your

K. M.' To this Freiligrath has not replied, and I don't know EXACTLY what footing we are on now. Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

313

[Manchester, 11 or 12 December 1859] Dear Moor,

Herewith POST OFFICE ORDER for £5 payable at Camden Town. Beta is the dirtiest dog I have ever come across. The infamous article d

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: ENGELS TO MARX515

[^5]: IN LONDON

[^6]: a [H.] B[eta,] 'Ferdinand Freiligrath', Die Gartenlaube, No. 43, 1859. - b [K. Vogt,] 'Zur Warnung', Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150 (supplement), 2 June 1859. -

[^7]: c horrible to say - d [H.] B[eta,] 'Ferdinand Freiligrath', Die Gartenlaube, No. 43,1859.



