---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "314. Marx to Engels. 13 December "
Page_Range: "586-588"
---

# 314. Marx to Engels. 13 December 

Darwin, by the way, whom I'm reading just now, is absolutely splendid.3 There was one aspect of teleology that had yet to be demolished, and that has now been done. Never before has so grandiose an attempt been made to demonstrate' historical evolution in Nature, and certainly never to such good effect. One does, of course, have to put up with the crude English method.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

314

MARX TO ENGELS516

[London,] 13 December 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill Dear Engels,

MY BEST THANKS FOR THE £5. You can imagine how opportune it was, for in a day or two my wife has to pay an instalment to some fellow at

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Ch. Darwin, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection





**[p. 552]**

In Russia the movement is progressing better than anywhere else in Europe. On the one hand the constitutionalism of the aristocracy versus the Tsar, on the other of the peasants versus the aristocracy. Moreover, having at long last realised that the Poles have not the least inclination to be dissolved in Slav-Russian nationality, Alexander blustered frightfully. Thus the extraordi- nary successes of Russian diplomacy during the past 15 years, notably since 1849, are more than counter-balanced. Come the next revolution and Russia will oblige by joining in.

You have, I imagine, read Bonaparte's uneasy document addressed to the préfets in which he demands that exact returns be made of, inter alia, all respectable Orleanists,124 Legitimists,303

republicans and socialists, but more especially of 'reliable' Bonapartists?

From the enclosed note you will see that that louse, Juch— PROPRIETOR of the Hermann—feels entitled to approach me about the Stieber affair.517 The rotten swine had deleted from Eichhoff's denunciation of Stieber in the Hermann* everything relating to our trial, ' the 'small, insignificant party' being alluded to only en passant I shall give the low scoundrel a proper dressing-down while, of course, doing everything in my power to damage that rascal Stieber. Eichhoff, by the by, was simply a tool where all these Stieber revelations were concerned. The business originated with ex-policeman Duncker in Berlin, whose removal in 1848 was largely brought about by Stieber's yapping from the democratic camp. From then on Duncker got his private police to watch Stieber's every step until he finally thought the moment had come for him to be kicked out. Furthermore, that ass Eichhoff was stupid enough to show his ass's ears in his last article from Berlin in the Hermann, in which HE WOUND UP HIS DENUNCIATIONS AGAINST

Nothing but fools and rapscallions, all these chaps, against whom Freiligrath bears no grudge, even if they do 'take liberties with his name'.

[^1]: STIEBER—WITH WHAT? W I T H THE REQUEST OF THE RESTITUTIO IN INTEGRUM OF VIRTUOUS Police Superintendent Duncker.b

[^2]: a [K. W. Eichhoff,] 'Stieber', Hermann, Nos. 36-38, 40, 42 and 43; 10, 17, 24 September and 8, 22 and 29 October 1859. - b [K. W. Eichhoff,] 'Berlin, 8. Nov. (Stieber)', Hermann, No. 45, 12 November 1859.



