---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "315. Engels to Marx. 19 December "
Page_Range: "588-589"
---

# 315. Engels to Marx. 19 December 



**[p. 553]**

UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES I HOPE TO SEE YOU HERE FOR SOME DAYS. Regards to Lupus. Salut

Your

K. M.

Little Jenny has made a copy of a Raphael Madonna especially for you, and of 2 wounded French soldiers for Lupus.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Worts, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

315

ENGELS TO MARX518

IN LONDON

Manchester, [19 December 1859] 7 Southgate Dear Moor,

I slaved away all day so as to have the afternoon free for the article and, when I came to light the gas, it burnt so low that the whole office had to stop work. At home it's been worse if anything for almost a week now; the prolonged spell of frost and fog has so increased the consumption of gas during the day that by the evening there's no pressure at all and hence no light. This makes it impossible for me to do the article today, and anyhow it may well gain by my having to wait until the day after tomorrow or Thursday, since the move from Ceuta against Tetuan should begin any day now.519 Admittedly, this will be pretty awful for you, •since it means you'll have to slave away tomorrow when you had D<jen counting on me.

Siebel has been to Hamburg, where he was told by the literary Bohemians that 'Freiligrath has broken with Marx'. So you can see how Mr Kinkel is still carrying on the business of article-writing, self-advertising tittle-tattle even now that Mockel3 is dead. Mr Strodtmann, presently on the Hamburg Freischütz, has apparently reverted to being a faithful disciple of Johann Gottfried.

[^1]: 11 Johanna Kinkel - b Gottfried Kinkel. Engels ironically calls him Johann after his wife, Johanna Kinkel.

[^2]: 19-194



