---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "317. Engels to Jenny Marx. 22 December "
Page_Range: "590-596"
---

# 317. Engels to Jenny Marx. 22 December 

to describe him (Blind) as the Kinkel of South Germany.520

I must now do' my article. Don't know what about. Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

317

ENGELS'TO JENNY MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 December 1859

Dear Mrs Marx,

I take the liberty today of sending you a dozen bottles of wine for the festive season in the hope that they will be to your liking and contribute to the FAMILY'S cheer.

The champagne and Bordeaux (Château d'Arcins) can be drunk at once, while the port wine should be allowed to rest a little and won't be in proper condition until about New Year.

It's forever the same old thing with that belletristic lot; they always want the newspapers to pay them homage, always want their names kept before the public, and the most inept little couplet of their own devising is of greater moment to them than the most tremendous historical event. Since none of this is attainable unless organised by a coterie, it goes without saying that the latter becomes the prime requirement, and we poor communists are, alas, completely useless in that respect; worse still, we are fully alive to the swindle, deride this organisation du succès, and ourselves feel almost criminally averse to becoming popular personalities. Now it shows great stupidity if, for these reasons, such a poet feels ill at ease in such a party, for here there is absolutely none of the

[^1]: I have been frankly annoyed here by the Freiligrath goings-on.b

[^2]: a S. L. Borkheim, 'An die Redaction des Hermann', Hermann, No 50, 17 December 1859. - b See this volume, pp. 532-36, 543-44 and 548-49.

[^3]: 19*



Volk, INDEED! The Gartenlaube is a very different kind of paper, and unctuous Bettziech a very different kind of man from the communists.b After all in the Gartenlaube they still treat us as a poet's family and accord us a weekly mention, nor does crooked • Bettziech ever let slip an opportunity to pay us a little compliment or give us a puff.—-True, Kinkel is praised far more highly for his poetry, which is greatly inferior to ours, and they publish many more anecdotes about him, but the man is Bettziech's patron after all, and everything will come right in the end. And then, take the Schiller festival! These communists despise and deride Schiller, so how could one run a Schiller festival with them? But the Schiller festival is more important than all the rest of history put together and, after all, why was Schiller born a 100 years ago if not for us to write a cantata about him today?c

And then there is the further consideration that the noble Ferdinand's poetry pretty well dried up years ago and the little he still manages to extract from his noddle is appallingly bad. This necessitates thinking up DODGES such as collected editions, etc., and that's something that can't be done every day. So, in order that one should not be forgotten, a puff becomes daily more of a necessity. Who, IN FACT, ever talked about Freiligrath between 1849 and 1858? Nobody. It was Bettziech who first rediscovered this classic writer, who had been so lost from mind that he was used only as Christmas and birthday presents and no longer figured in literature but in the history of literature. And, of course, nobody was to blame for all this save Karl Marx, with his 'inspiration'. But once F. Freiligrath has been thoroughly warmed up by the incense

[^1]: a But what can you expect? - b An allusion to Beta's article 'Ferdinand Freiligrath' published in Die Gartenlaube, No. 43, 1859. - c This refers to Freiligrath's poem 'Zur Schillerfeier, 10. November 1859. Festlied der Deutschen in London'. See also this volume, p. 511.



of the Gartenlaube, then you'll see what poetry will come bubbling out of him!

How petty, shabby and paltry are the doings of these poets! Give me Siebel any day; he may be a rotten poet, but he does at least know that he is a thorough humbug and all he asks is to be allowed to advertise himself—nowadays a necessary procédé without which he would be a complete nonentity.

But you really mustn't take all this bickering too much to heart. As a 'personage'a Freiligrath is bound sooner or later to betray weaknesses such as will put him into our hands when the time is ripe. Meanwhile, no breach if it can be avoided.

I am very sorry that I shan't be able to come up on Friday, but there are such a lot of changes going on here that yesterday, for instance, I had to slave away till 9.45 at night, and there can be no question of getting away.

My warmest regards to Moor and the YOUNG LADIES'3

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Presumably an allusion to a line from Chapter 24 of Heine's satirical poem Atta Troll which describes the hero as 'no talent but a personage'. - b Jenny and Laura Marx





APPENDIX



