---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "3. Jenny Marx to Engels. 31 July 1857 "
Page_Range: "598-600"
---

# 3. Jenny Marx to Engels. 31 July 1857 



**[p. 563]**

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS5M

IN MANCHESTER

[London; about 12 April 1857]

Dear Mr Engels,

One invalid is writing for another by ordre du mufti.2 Chaley'sb

head hurts him almost everywhere, terrible tooth-ache, pains in the ears, head, eyes, throat and God knows what else. Neither opium pills nor creosote do any good. The tooth has got to come out and he jibs at the idea. Now I am appealing to you to step into the breach with an article for Friday. No matter what subject. *There was, for instance, the sending of troops and ships for China, there was also a change in the organisation of the Russian army, or Bonaparte or Switzerland or yarn or anything else. One column will do.*c Assuming, of course, that you've got over your own eye-trouble. If you possibly can, drop us a note to let us know whether you are able to do the article. Did the eye lotion help at all?

Warm regards from

Jenny Marx

[London, 31 July 1857]

Dear Mr Engels,

The wine has just arrived. The children's exultation knew no end. The girls examined the bottles very closely and found the

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, , , . , , . „ . . . c , ,. Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: JENNY MARX TO ENGELS524

[^3]: IN WATERLOO NEAR MANCHESTER

[^4]: a order of the mufti—a jocular nickname for Karl Marx - b Karl Marx's - c In reply to this request Engels wrote the article 'Changes in the Russian Army'.





**[p. 564]**

We are all so very worried about your indisposition and this fresh cold you have caught. But a cold is unavoidable at the beginning of a stay by the seaside. The evenings are already quite cool. So see that you dress especially warmly in the evenings. Karl is very much affected by your indisposition. He would very much like to go and see you but it is absolutely out of the question just now and that annoys him so much. Just leave the 'drudgery' for the time being.

Karl is BUSY shaping the INDIAN NEWS into an article.b Dear little Jenny and Laura are now replacing me in my capacity as secretary. They have ousted me altogether with the chi-i-ief of the household.

On Tuesday morning0 a cab stopped in front of our door, and who do you think stepped out? Conrad Schramm, whom we thought dead long ago. That FOOL Seiler had already written an obituary notice about him in the evening papers. The poor fellow is very very unwell. A real picture of misery. Yesterday Karl got him admitted to the German hospital, where he is being very well looked after for £1 a WEEK. In his mind, by the way, Schramm is the same as of old, just as he was in his early, good period, when we all liked him for his buoyancy and FRANKNESS. He is continually cracking very good jokes about God and the world. But of the latter, so he thinks, he must soon take his leave. Fortunately he has kept free of the 'American clarity' by which old Mirbach and mv brother Edgar distinguished themselves so very much.

Karl will be writing tomorrow.d Warmest greetings from all of us.

Your

Jenny Marx

[^1]: Published for the first time Printed according to the original

[^2]: a Eleanor Marx - h K. Marx, 'Indian News'. - c 28 July 1857 - <* No letters by Marx to Engels dated earlier than 9 August 1857 have reached us.



