---
Volume: 40
Document_Title: "11. Jenny Marx to Engels. 23 or 24 December 1859 "
Page_Range: "608-614"
---

# 11. Jenny Marx to Engels. 23 or 24 December 1859 

First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow, 1962

Your

Jenny Marx

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

10

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS531

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 4 November 1859]

Dear Mr Engels,

Szemere is constantly pestering Moor for the Tribune articlea he promised him. Another dunning letter arrived this morning. Karl, who is struggling with Friday's article, begs you to send him the Kossuth article as soon as possible.

Warmest regards from the girls and myself.

Your

Jenny M.

11

[London, 23 or 24 December 1859]

My dear Mr Engels,

My most heartfelt thanks for the Christmas HAMPER. The champagne will be a tremendous help in tiding us over the

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow, 1962

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: JENNY MARX TO ENGELS532

[^5]: IN MANCHESTER

[^6]: a K. Marx, 'Kossuth and Louis Napoleon'.



I have been terribly irritated by fleshy philistine Freiligrath and his Westphalian rectitude and respectability. On the other hand I was greatly amused today by your letter about the fat man and the lean woman,3 and I cannot understand why I sometimes let the wretches' behaviour upset me so. Had we been 'BETTER OFF' this year, I'd have seen the funnier side of all this trouble, but humour goes by the board when one is constantly having to struggle against the pettiest misère; never have I found it so oppressive as now, when our dear little girls, who are blossoming so sweetly, have to endure it too. And then, on top of that, the secret hopes we had long nourished in regard to Karl's bookb were all set at naught by the Germans' conspiration de silence, only broken by a couple of wretched, belletristic feuilleton articles which confined themselves to the preface and ignored the contents of the book. The second instalment473 may startle the slugabeds out of their lethargy and then they will attack its line of thought the more ferociously for having kept silent about the scientific nature of the work. Nous verrons!1 I am, too, particularly curious to see what Ephraim Artfuld is going to hatch out. For his conduct in the matter is not altogether clear; Prussian Blue, like Ferdinand the Pure,e must be treated with great circumspection just now. and an official breach with the latter must still be postponed. He's only so thick with Blind because the latter was his MANSERVANT in the great Kinkel affair and stood up for his rights on the boozy Schiller committee. Because Blind helped by seeing to it that the bust of Schiller was unveiled (the green serge cover positively refused to come off until 4 men had tugged at and tussled with it) during his cantata' and not during the LOW COMEDIANS SEMAPHORING,8 he now has to stand publicly side by side with the arrant liar and cover the latter's mendacity and cowardice with his own political loyalty and purity. Fazy's miserable lackey! But enough of these dratted people! I am also sending you my brother's bookh through Chaplin. It might interest you and provide you with matter for a

[^1]: a Ferdinand and Ida Freiligrath. See pp. 555-56. - b K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. - c We shall see. - d Ferdinand Lassalle - e Ferdinand Lassalle and Ferdinand Freiligrath - f F. Freiligrath, 'Zur Schillerfeier. 10. November 1859. Festlied der Deutschen in London'. - 8 Kinkel's speech, see also this volume, pp. 512-13. - h Chr. H. Ph. von Westphalen, Geschichte der Feldzüge des Herzogs Ferdinand von Braunschxveig-Lüneburg Hrsg. von F.O.W.H. von Westphalen.





[^1]: a my dear brother - b See this volume, pp. 561-62. - c Ludwig von Westphalen - d Heinrich Georg von West p." • len - e Caroline von Westphalen



Jenny Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

NOTES

AND INDEXES



