---
Volume: 28
Document_Title: "1. Production "
Page_Range: "42-51"
---

# 1. Production 



**[p. 17]**

[M-l] A) INTRODUCTION 6

I. PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION, DISTRIBUTION, EXCHANGE (CIRCULATION)7

1. PRODUCTION

(a) To begin with, the subject to be discussed is material production.

Individuals producing in a society—hence the socially deter- mined production by individuals is of course the point of departure. The individual and isolated hunter and fisherman, who serves Adam Smith and Ricardo as a starting point,3 is one of the unimaginative fantasies of the 18th century. Robinsonades which, contrary to the fancies of the historians of civilisation, by no means signify simply a reaction against over-refinement and a reversion to a misconceived natural life. No more is Rousseau's contrat social,8

which by means of a contract establishes a relationship and connection between subjects that are by nature INDEPENDENT, based on this kind of naturalism. This is an illusion and nothing but the aesthetic illusion of the small and big Robinsonades. It is, rather, the anticipation of "bourgeois society",9 which began to evolve in the 16th century and was making giant strides towards maturity in the 18th. In this society of free competition the individual seems to be rid of the natural, etc., ties which in earlier historical epochs made him an appurtenance of a particular, limited aggregation of human beings. The prophets of the 18th century, on whose shoulders Smith and Ricardo were still standing completely, envisaged this 18th-century individual—a product of the dissolu- tion of the feudal forms of society on the one hand, and of the new productive forces evolved since the 16th century on the other—as an ideal whose existence belonged to the past. They saw

[^1]: a See the Introduction to A. Smith's An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Vol. I, London, 1835, p. 2) and Section III, Chapter I of D. Ricardo's On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation (3rd ed., London, 1821, pp. 16-23).— Ed.





**[p. 18]**

this individual not as an historical result, but as the starting point of history; not as something evolving in the course of history, but posited by nature, because for them this individual was the natural individual, according to their idea of human nature. This delusion has been characteristic of every new epoch hitherto. Steuart, who in many respects was in opposition to the 18th century and as an aristocrat tended rather to regard things from an historical standpoint, avoided this naive view.

The further back we go in history, the more does the individual, and accordingly also the producing individual, appear to be dependent and belonging to a larger whole. At first, he is still in a quite natural manner part of the family, and of the family expand- ed into the tribe 10; later he is part of a community, of one of the different forms of community which arise from the conflict and the merging of tribes. It is not until the 18th century, in "bourgeois society", that the various forms of the social nexus confront the individual as merely a means towards his private ends, as external necessity. But the epoch which produces this standpoint, that of the isolated individual, is precisely the epoch of the hitherto most highly developed social (according to this standpoint, general) relations. Man is a £wov TTOA-ITIXOV11 in the most literal sense: he is not only a social animal, but an animal that can isolate itself [M-2] only within society. Production by an isolated individual outside society—something rare, which might occur when a civilised person already dynamically in possession of the social forces is accidentally cast into the wilderness—is just as preposterous as the development of language without individuals who live together and speak to one another. It is unnecessary to dwell upon this point further. It need not have been mentioned at all if this inanity, which was understandable in people of the 18th century, had not been in all seriousness introduced into the most modern [political] economy by Bastiat, Carey, Proudhon,3 etc. It is of course pleasant for Proudhon, for instance, to give a historico-philosophical explanation of the origin of an economic relationship whose historical genesis he does not know by indulging in a bit of mythology asserting that Adam or Prom- etheus hit upon the ready-made idea, which was then put into practice,13 etc. Nothing is more tedious and dull than the fantasies of locus communis.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 10, 13.— Ed. b P. J. Proudhon, Système des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère, Vol. I, Ch. 2, § 1, Paris, 1846, pp. 77-83.— Ed.





m?&

[^1]: Back of the cover and page 1 of Notebook M containing the Introduction



«-•yv*^. ***"**> *V»*V**- - H - .TV*^H St***"

K ^ ^ . *»v*y» *..*•** ^^y^ *v*-*'-'**~***rf***M'

-j-ji-f^w. *<-rf* •*-'W*V *-fr** "^4~ffc***v

t&éi^. , m

[^1]: ^ A ^ - V *«*>! V—vp V *•* « ^ ***"

[^2]: - **~7 H «-»• ** TV*"-V*S-/SW







**[p. 23]**

If there is no production in general, there is also no general production. Production is always a particular branch of produc- tion—e.g., agriculture, cattle-breeding, manufacture, etc.—or it is

[^1]: 3*





**[p. 24]**

Finally, production is not only particular production, but it is invariably a definite social body, a social subject, that is active in a wider or narrower totality of branches of production. The relation of the scientific presentation to the actual movement does not yet belong here either. Production in general. Particular branches of production. Totality of production.

It is fashionable to preface economic works with a general part—and it is just this that appears under the heading "Production" (see for instance J. St. Mill3)—which deals with the general conditions of all production.

This general part comprises or purports to comprise:

1. The conditions without which production is impossible. This means in fact only that the essential moments of all production are indicated. But actually this boils down, as we shall see, to a few very simple definitions, which are expanded into trivial tautologies.

2. The conditions which promote production to a larger or smaller degree, as in the case of Adam Smith's progressive and stagnant state of society.b In Smith's work this [proposition] has its value as an aperçu, but to raise it to scientific significance an inquiry into the degree of productivity at various periods in the development of individual nations would be necessary. Such an inquiry lies outside the actual framework of the subject, yet those aspects which are relevant to it must be dealt with in discussing competition, accumulation, etc. The answer in its general form amounts to the general statement that an industrial nation is at the height of its production when it is at all at the height of its historical development. IN FACT, a nation is at the height of its industrial development so long as gaining, not gain, is its principal aim. In this respect the Yankees are ahead of the English. Or else that for example certain racial characteristics, climates, natural conditions, such as maritime position, fertility of the soil, etc., are more favourable to production than others. This again amounts to the •tautology that wealth is the easier to produce the more— subjectively and objectively—its elements are available.

[^1]: a J. St. Mill, Principles of Political Economy with some of their Applications to Social Philosophy, Vol. I, London, 1848, pp. 29-236.— Ed.

[^2]: b A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vol. I, London, 1835, pp. 171-209 and 220-21; Vol. II, London, 1836, pp. 168-74.— Ed.



To this, only a very brief reply is needed: Regarding (1): All production is appropriation of nature by the individual within and by means of a definite form of society. In this sense it is a tautology to say that property (appropriation) is a condition of production. But it is ridiculous to make a leap from this to a definite form of property, e.g. private property (this is moreover an antithetical form, which presupposes non-property as a condition, too). History shows, on the contrary, that common property (e.g., among the Indians, Slavs, ancient Celts, etc.) is the earlier form, a form which in the shape of communal property continues to play a significant role for a long time. The question whether wealth develops better under this or under that form of property is not yet under discussion here. But it is tautological to say that where no form of property exists there can be no production and hence no society either. Appropriation which appropriates nothing is a contradictio in subjecto.

Regarding (2): Safeguarding of what has been acquired, etc. If

[^1]: a J. St. Mill, op. cit., pp. 25-26 and 239-40.— Ed.



