---
Volume: 28
Document_Title: "4. Production. Means of Production and Relations of Production. Relations of Production and Conditions of Communication. Forms of the State and of Consciousness in Relation to the Relations of Production and of Commerce. Legal Relations. Family Relations "
Page_Range: "70-74"
---

# 4. Production. Means of Production and Relations of Production. Relations of Production and Conditions of Communication. Forms of the State and of Consciousness in Relation to the Relations of Production and of Commerce. Legal Relations. Family Relations 



**[p. 45]**

Another example of the different roles which the same categories play at different stages of society are JOINT-STOCK COMPANIES, one of the most recent features of bourgeois society; but they appear also in its early period in the form of large privileged commercial companies with rights of monopoly.

The concept of national wealth finds its way into the works of the economists of the 17th century as the notion that wealth is created solely for the State, whose power, on the other hand, is proportional to this wealth—a notion which to some extent survives among 18th-century economists. This was still the unintentionally hypocritical form in which wealth itself and the production of wealth was proclaimed to be the goal of the modern State, which was regarded merely as a means for producing wealth.

The arrangement has evidently to be made as follows: (1) The general abstract determinations, which therefore apper- tain more or less to all forms of society, but in the sense set forth above. (2) The categories which constitute the internal structure of bourgeois society and on which the principal classes are based. Capital, wage labour, landed property. Their relation to one another. Town and country. The 3 large social classes. Exchange between them. Circulation. Credit system (private). (3) The State as the epitome of bourgeois society. Analysed in relation to itself. The "unproductive" classes. Taxes. National debt. Public credit. Population. Colonies. Emigration. (4) International character of production. International division of labour. International ex- change. Export and import. Rate of exchange. (5) World market and crises.

NB. Notes regarding points which have to be mentioned here and should not be forgotten:

(1) War develops [certain features] earlier than peace; the way in which as a result of war, and in the armies, etc., certain economic conditions, e.g. wage labour, machinery, etc., were evolved earlier than within civil society. The relation between productive power and conditions of communication is likewise particularly evident in the army.

[^1]: [M-21] 4. PRODUCTION.

[^2]: MEANS OF PRODUCTION AND RELATIONS OF PRODUCTION. RELATIONS OF PRODUCTION AND CONDITIONS OF COMMUNICATION.

[^3]: FORMS OF THE STATE AND OF CONSCIOUSNESS IN RELATION

[^4]: TO THE RELATIONS OF PRODUCTION AND OF COMMERCE.

[^5]: LEGAL RELATIONS. FAMILY RELATIONS





**[p. 46]**

(2) The relation of the hitherto existing idealistic historiography to realistic historiography. In particular what is known as history of civilisation, which is all a history of religion and states. (In this context something can also be said about the various kinds of historiography hitherto existing. So-called objective,18 subjective (moral and other kinds), philosophical [historiography].)

(3) Secondary and tertiary [relations], in general derived and transmitted, non-original, relations of production. The influence of international relations here.

(4) Reproaches about the materialism of this conception. Relation to naturalistic materialism.

(5) Dialectic of the concepts productive power (means of production) and relation of production, a dialectic whose limits have to be defined and which does not abolish real difference.

(6) The unequal development of material production and e.g. art. In general, the concept of progress is not to be taken in the usual abstract form. With regard to art, etc., this disproportion is not so important and [not so] difficult to grasp as within practical social relations themselves, e.g. in culture. Relation of the United States to Europe. However, the really difficult point to be discussed here is how the relations of production as legal relations enter into uneven development. For example, the relation of Roman civil law (this applies in smaller measure to criminal and public law) to modern production.

(7) This conception3 appears to be an inevitable development. But vindication of chance. How. (Of freedom, etc., as well.) (Influence of the means of communication. World history did not exist always; history as world history is a result).

(8) The starting point is of course determinateness by nature; subjectively and objectively. Tribes, races, etc.

(1) As regards art, it is known that certain periods of its florescence by no means correspond to the general development of society, or, therefore, to the material basis, the skeleton as it were of its organisation. For example, the Greeks compared with the moderns, or else Shakespeare. It is even acknowledged that certain forms of art, e.g. epos, can no longer be produced in their epoch-making, classic form after artistic production as such has begun; in other words that certain important creations within the compass of art are only possible at an early stage of its

[^1]: a Marx apparently means the conception of history discussed in the preceding points.— Ed.





**[p. 47]**

[M-22] Let us take, for example, the relation of Greek art, and that of Shakespeare, to the present time. We know that Greek mythology is not only the arsenal of Greek art, but also its basis. Is the conception of nature and of social relations which underlies Greek imagination and therefore Greek [art] possible in the age of SELFACTORS, railways, locomotives and electric telegraphs? What is Vulcan compared with Roberts and Co.,19 Jupiter compared with the lightning conductor, and Hermes compared with the Crédit Mobilier20? All mythology subdues, dominates and fashions the forces of nature in the imagination and through the imagination; it therefore disappears when real domination over these forces is established. What becomes of Fama beside Printing House Square21? Greek art presupposes Greek mythology, in other words, nature and even the social forms have already been worked up in an unconsciously artistic manner by the popular imagina- tion. This is the material of Greek art. Not just any mythology, i.e. not any unconsciously artistic working up of nature (here the term comprises all objective phenomena, including society). Egyptian mythology could never become the basis or material womb of Greek art. But at any rate [it presupposes] a mythology. Hence, on no account a social development which precludes any mythological, [i.e.] any mythologising, attitude towards nature, and therefore demands from the artist an imagination independent of mythology.

Regarded from another angle: is Achilles possible when powder and shot have been invented? And is the Iliad possible at all when the printing press and even printing machines exist? Does not the press bar inevitably spell the end of singing and reciting and the muses, that is, do not the conditions necessary for epic poetry disappear?

But the difficulty lies not in understanding that Greek art and epic poetry are bound up with certain forms of social develop- ment. The difficulty is that they still give us aesthetic pleasure and are in certain respects regarded as a standard and unattainable model.

An adult cannot become a child again, or he becomes childish. But does not the naivete of the child give him pleasure, and must



**[p. 48]**

Written in late August 1857 Printed according to the manu First published in the journal Die Neue Zeit, Bd. I, Nos. 23-25, 1902-03

