---
Volume: 28
Document_Title: "Exchange between Capital and Labour "
Page_Range: "229-255"
---

# Exchange between Capital and Labour 



**[p. 204]**

MASTER; UNPRODUCTIVE AS TO THE MATERIAL RESULT OF THEIR LABOUR. I N FACT, t h i s "productive" worker is just as interested in the shit which he must make as the capitalist who employs him, and who does not give a damn about the junk. But looked at more precisely, it turns out in fact that the true definition of a productive worker consists in this: a man who requires and demands absolutely no more than is necessary to enable him to bring to his capitalist the greatest possible advantage. ALL THIS NONSENSE. Digression. But have to return to the productive and unproductive in more detail later.82,/'

EXCHANGE BETWEEN CAPITAL AND LABOUR

Use value confronting capital as posited exchange value is labour. Capital exchanges itself, or exists in this specific form only in relation to non-capital, the negation of capital, in respect to which alone it is capital; the real non-capital is labour.

If we consider the exchange between capital and labour, we find that it is divided into two processes which are not only formally but qualitatively distinct and even contradictory:

(1) The worker exchanges his commodity, labour, the use value which as a commodity also has a price like all other commodities, for a specific sum of exchange values, specific sum of money, which capital cedes to him.

(2) The capitalist obtains, in exchange, labour itself, labour as value-positing activity, as productive labour; i.e. he obtains the productive power which maintains and multiplies capital and which therefore becomes the productive power and reproducing power of capital, a power belonging to capital itself.

The separation of these two processes is so evident that they can fall asunder in time and need in no way coincide. The first process can be completed, and in most cases is to a certain extent completed, before the second has even begun. The completion of the second act implies the completion of the product. The payment of wages cannot wait for this. We shall even find it an essential characteristic of the relationship [between worker and capitalist] that it does not do so.

In simple exchange, circulation, this two-fold process does not occur. If commodity a is exchanged for money b, and this then for commodity c which is destined for consumption—the original object of the exchange for a—the use of commodity c, its



**[p. 205]**

consumption, falls quite outside circulation; does not concern the form of the [economic] relationship; lies beyond circulation itself, and is a purely physical interest which now only expresses a relationship of individual A in his natural quality to an object of his individual need. What he does with commodity c is a question that lies outside the economic relationship.

Here, on the contrary, the use value of what is exchanged for money appears as a particular economic relationship, and the specific utilisation of what is exchanged for money constitutes the ultimate purpose of both processes. Thus there is already a distinction of form between the exchange of capital and labour and simple exchange—two distinct processes.

If we now investigate further how the exchange between capital and labour differs in content from simple exchange (circulation), we find that this distinction does not arise from an external relation or comparison, but that in the totality of the latter process the second form distinguishes itself from the first, that the comparison itself is included. T h e difference of the second act from the first—the particular process of appropriation of labour on the part of capital is the second act—is EXACTLY the distinction between the exchange of capital and labour and the exchange of commodities as mediated by money. In the exchange between capital and labour, the first act is an exchange and falls wholly within ordinary circulation; the second is a process qualitatively different from exchange and it is only BY MISUSE that it could have been called exchange of any kind at all. It stands directly opposed to exchange; essentially different category.

^Capital. I. Generality: (1) (a) Evolution of capital from money, (b) Capital and labour (mediating itself by alien labour), (c) T h e elements of capital, distinguished according to their relationship to labour (product, raw material, instrument of labour). (2) Particularisation of capital: (a) Circulating capital, fixed capital. Turnover of capital. (3) Singularity of capital: Capital and profit. Capital and interest. Capital as value, distinct from itself as interest and profit.

[^1]: II. Particularity: (1) Accumulation of capitals. (2) Competition of capitals. (3) Concentration of capitals (quantitative difference of capital as at the same time qualitative, as measure of its volume and effect).3

[^2]: a Here the following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "(b) Capital as credit, (c) Share capital, (d) The money market, (e) Capital as determining price."—Ed.





**[p. 206]**

[11-23] III. Singularity. (1) Capital as credit. (2) Capital as share capital. (3) Capital as money market.

In the money market, capital is posited in its totality; there it determines price, provides work, regulates production, in a word, source of production; but capital, not only as something producing itself (materially by means of industry, etc., positing price, developing the productive forces), but at the same time as creator of values, must posit a value or form of wealth specifically distinct from capital. This is rent. It is the only value created by capital as value distinct from itself, and from its own production. Both by its nature and historically, capital is the creator of modern landed property, of rent; just as its action therefore appears also as the dissolution of the old form of landed property. The new form arises from the action of capital on the old. Capital is this—in one respect—as creator of modern agriculture. In the economic relationships of modern landed property which appears as a process: rent—capital—wage labour (the form of the series can also be otherwise conceived as: wage labour—capital—rent; but capital must always be the active middle element), the inner structure of modern society, or capital in the totality of its relations, is therefore posited.

The question now is: how does the transition from landed property to wage labour come about? (The transition from wage labour to capital comes about of itself; for capital here has returned into its active ground.) Historically, the transition is indisputable. It is already implied in the fact that [modern] landed property is the product of capital. We thus always find that wherever the reaction of capital on the older forms of landed property converts the latter into money rent (the same thing occurs in other ways, where the modern farmer is created) and agriculture therefore, carried on by capital, is converted into industrial agronomy, the COTTIERS, serfs, villeins, copyholders, cottagers, etc., necessarily become day-labourers, wage labourers. Thus wage labour in its totality is first created by the action of capital upon landed property, and later, as soon as this has been elaborated as a form, by the landowner himself. The landowner himself then CLEARS the land, as Steuart says,3 of its superfluous mouths, rips the children of the earth away from the breast on which they were raised, and so converts even labour on the land, which appears by its nature as immediate source of subsistence,

[^1]: a J. Steuart, An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Öeconomy, Vol. I, Book 1, pp. 50, 153, 156 and 157.— Ed.



There can therefore be no doubt that wage labour in its classical form, as permeating the whole extent of society, and making itself in lieu of the soil the ground on which society rests, is first created by modern landed property, i.e. by landed property as a value created by capital itself. This is why landed property leads back to wage labour. It is in one respect nothing but the transference of wage labour from the towns to the countryside, therefore wage labour spread over the whole surface of society. The old landowner, if he is rich, does not require a capitalist to become a modern landowner. He only has to convert his labourers into wage labourers and to begin producing for profit instead of revenue. Then the modern tenant farmer and the modern landowner are presumed in his person. But it is not a formal distinction, that the form in which he receives his revenue or the form in which the labourer is paid, is changed; it implies, rather, a total transformation of the mode of production (of agriculture) itself; it therefore presupposes a particular level of development of industry, of trade and of science, in short of the productive forces.

In general, production based upon capital and wage labour is not only formally different from other modes of production, but also presupposes a total revolution and development of material production. Although capital as merchant capital can develop itself fully (only not to the same extent quantitatively) without this transformation of landed property, it cannot do so as industrial capital. Even the development of manufacture presupposes an incipient-dissolution of the old economic relationships of landed property. On the other hand, it is not until modern industry is developed to a high degree that this dissolution at individual points becomes the new form in its totality and full extent; but this development itself always proceeds the more quickly, the higher the development of modern agriculture, of the form of property, of the economic relationships corresponding to it. Thus England in this respect the model country for other, continental countries.

Equally: if the first form of industry, large-scale manufacture, already presupposes the dissolution of landed property, this dissolution, in turn, is determined by the subordinate development



**[p. 208]**

It must be kept in mind that the new productive forces and relations of production do not develop out of nothing, or out of thin air, or from the womb of the Idea positing itself, but within and in contradiction to the existing development of production and inherited, traditional property relations. If in the fully developed bourgeois system each economic relationship presup- poses the other in a bourgeois-economic form, and everything posited is thus also a premiss, that is the case with every [11-24] organic system. This organic system itself has its premisses as a totality, and its development into a totality consists precisely in subordinating all elements of society to itself, or in creating out of it the organs it still lacks. This is historically how it becomes a totality. Its becoming this totality constitutes a moment of its process, of its development.

On the other hand, if, within a society, the modern relations of production, i.e. capital, are developed in their totality, and this society now takes possession of a new terrain, as e.g. in the colonies, it finds, more especially its representative the capitalist finds, that his capital ceases to be capital without wage labour, and that one of the premisses of wage labour is not only landed property in general but modern landed property; landed property which, as capitalised rent, is expensive and as such excludes the direct utilisation of the soil by individuals. Therefore Wakefield's theory of colonisation, followed in practice by the English government in Australia. Landed property is here artificially raised in price in order to transform the workers into wage workers, to make capital act as capital, and thus to make the new colony productive; to develop wealth in it, instead of, as in America, using it for the direct provision of wage workers. Wakefield's theory is immensely important for a correct under- standing of modern landed property.83

Capital, as a producer of rent, thus returns to the production of wage labour as its general creative ground. Capital arises from circulation and posits labour as wage labour; thus it takes form, and developed as a whole it posits landed property both as its



**[p. 209]**

Thus two-fold transition to wage labour. This the positive side. Negatively, after capital has posited landed property and thereby achieved its two-fold aim: (1) industrial agriculture and thereby development of the productivity of the soil and (2) wage labour, therefore the general domination of capital on the land, it considers the existence of landed property itself as a purely transitory development, which is necessary as the action of capital on the old relationships of landed property, and is a product of their decomposition; but which as such—once this aim has been achieved—is merely a restriction on profit, not a necessity for production. Capital therefore seeks to dissolve landed property as private property and to transfer it to the State. This the negative side. Thus to transform the whole internal society into capitalists and wage labourers.

When capital has reached this point, wage labour has as well, and tries, like the bourgeois, to get rid of the landlords as supererogatory in order to simplify the relationship, to moderate taxes, etc., on the one hand; and on the other, in order to escape from wage labour and to become independent producer—for direct use—it demands the break-up of the great landed estates. Landed property is here negated from two directions; the negation from the direction of capital is only a change of form, to its undivided rule. (Rent as the general State rent (State tax), so that bourgeois society reproduces the medieval system in another way, but as the complete negation of it.) The negation from the direction of wage labour is only a hidden negation of capital, and therefore also of wage labour itself. It is now to be considered as independently confronting capital.

Thus the transition two-fold: (1) positive transition from modern landed property or transition of capital by means of modern landed property to general wage labour; (2) negative transition: negation of landed property by capital, i.e. negation of indepen- dent value by capital, i.e. precisely negation of capital by itself. But their negation is wage labour. Then negation of landed property and by means of it negation of capital from the direction of wage labour, i.e. wage labour that wishes to posit itself as independent.^



**[p. 210]**

SHARES; STEAM NAVIGATION SHARES; TELEGRAPH SHARES; OMNIBUS SHARES); SHARES of general industrial ENTERPRISES (MINING SHARES the main ones). T h e n for the supply of the general elements (GAS SHARES, SHARES in water- works). MISCELLANEOUS going into thousands. For the storing of commodities (DOCK SHARES, etc.). MISCELLANEOUS in infinite variety, such as ENTERPRISES of industrial or commercial companies based on shares. Finally for securing the whole, INSURANCE SHARES of all kinds.

Just as the market by and large divides itself into the HOME MARKET and the FOREIGN MARKET, so the domestic market itself divides further into MARKET OF HOME SHARES, NATIONAL FUNDS, etc., and FOREIGN FUNDS, FOREIGN [11-25] SHARES, etc. But this development really belongs to the world market, which is not only the domestic market in relation to all the FOREIGN MARKETS existing outside it, but at the same time the domestic market of all FOREIGN MARKETS, as, in turn, components of the HOME

T h e concentration of the money market in one main place within a country, whereas the other markets distribute themselves more according to the division of labour; although here also great concentration in the capital city, if this is also the port for its exports.

T h e markets distinct from the money market are in the first place as different as are the products and branches of production, and likewise constitute markets in their own right. T h e main markets for these different products establish themselves in centres which are such either in relation to import or export, or because they are either themselves centres of a particular production or the direct points of supply for such centres. But from this simple distinction, the markets proceed further to a more or less organic separation into large groups, which them- selves necessarily divide u p according to the basic elements of capital into: markets for products and markets for raw materials. T h e instrument of production as such constitutes no particular market; it exists as such mainly, first, in the raw materials

[^1]: MARKET.





**[p. 211]**

II. Raw produce. (1) Raw materials of the mechanised industry. Flax; hemp; cotton; silk; wool; hides; leather; gutta percha, etc. (2) Raw materials of the chemical industry. Potash, SALTPETRE; turpentine; nitrate OF soda, etc.

III. Raw materials which are at the same time instruments of production: Metals (copper, iron, tin, zinc, lead, steel, etc.). Wood. [Fire] WOOD. TIMBER. Dyer's wood. Timber for ship-building, etc. Accessory means of production and raw materials. DRUGS and DYES (cochineal, indigo, etc.). Tar. Tallow. Oils. Coal, etc.84

Each product must naturally enter the market; but really large markets, as distinct from retail trade, are formed only by the important products for consumption (economically important only the market for grain, tea, sugar and COFFEE; wine-market to some extent and the market for spirits in general) or those which are the raw materials of industry (wool, silk, wood, metal-market, etc.). At which point the abstract category of the market has to be brought in, will become clear l a t e r . ^

T h e exchange between the worker and the capitalist is a simple exchange; each obtains an equivalent; the one money, the other a commodity whose price is exactly equal to the money paid for it. What the capitalist receives in this simple exchange is a use value: disposition over alien labour. From the worker's side—and this is the exchange in which he appears as seller—it is evident that for him, as for the seller of any other commodity, of a use value, the use the buyer makes of the purchased commodity does not concern the characteristic form of the relationship. What the worker sells is the disposition over his labour, which is a specific labour, specific skill, etc.



**[p. 212]**

If the capitalist were to content himself with the mere right of disposing, without actually setting the worker to work, e.g. in order to have his labour as a reserve, etc.,or to take away the right of disposing over that labour from his competitors (as e.g. theatre directors purchase singers for a SEASON, not to let them sing but so that they do not sing in a rival theatre), the exchange would have taken place in full. The worker receives the exchange value in money, the general form of wealth in a definite quantity, and the more or less he receives procures for him a greater or smaller share in general wealth. How this more or less is determined, how the quantity of money he obtains is measured, concerns the general relationship so little that it cannot be deduced from it as such. In general, the exchange value of his commodity can only be determined not by the way in which the buyer uses his commodity but only by the quantity of objectified labour present in the commodity itself; here, therefore, by the quantity of labour required to produce the worker himself. For the use value which [11-26] he offers exists only as ability, as his bodily capacity; it has no existence outside of that. The objectified labour necessary both to maintain the general substance in which his labour capacity85

exists, i.e. bodily to maintain the worker himself, as well as to modify this general substance for the development of the particular capacity—that is the labour objectified in this substance. This, in general terms, is the measure of the quantity of value, the sum of money, which he receives in exchange. This is not yet the place for the further development of the argument as to how the wages of labour are determined like [the value of] all other commodities by the labour time necessary to produce the worker as such.

In circulation, when I exchange a commodity for money and for that money purchase a commodity and satisfy my need, the act is at an end. So it is with the worker. But he has the possibility to

Consumption CERTAINLY reacts back upon production; but this reaction concerns the worker in his exchange as little as it does every other seller of a commodity; rather, from the standpoint of simple circulation—and as yet we have no other developed relationship before us—it falls outside the economic relationship. This much, however, can already be said in passing: that the relative limitation of the range of the workers' consumption, which is only quantitative, not qualitative, or rather qualitative only as posited by quantity, gives them as consumers (in the course of the further analysis of capital, the relationship of consumption and production must, in general, be considered more closely) a quite different importance as agents of production from that which they possess and possessed in e.g. ancient world, in the Middle Ages or in Asia. But all this does not belong here, as we have already said.

Equally, while the worker receives his equivalent in the form of money, in the form of general wealth, he figures in this exchange as the equal of the capitalist, like every other exchanger; at least, in appearance. In FACT, this equality is already disturbed in that his relationship as worker to the capitalist, as use value in the form specifically distinct from exchange value, in contrast to the value posited as value, is presupposed for this apparently simple exchange. He therefore already stands in a differently determined economic relationship—outside that of exchange, in which the nature of the use value, the particular use value of the commodity as such, is immaterial.

This appearance, however, exists as an illusion on his part and to a certain extent on the other side, and therefore essentially

[^1]: 9-852





**[p. 214]**

What he gives up is the right of disposition over his labour. On the other hand, it is true that even within simple circulation, coin may develop into money and that, therefore, in so far as he receives coin in exchange, he can convert it into money, by accumulating it, etc., withdrawing it from circulation; fixing it as general form of wealth, instead of as vanishing means of exchange. In this respect it could thus be said that, in the exchange of the worker with capital, his object—and therefore also the product of the exchange for him—is not means of subsistence but wealth, not a particular use value, but exchange value as such. According to this, the worker could make exchange value into his own product in the only way wealth can appear at all as product of simple circulation in which equivalents are exchanged, namely by sacrificing substantial satisfaction to the form of wealth, i.e. by self-denial, saving, cutting down his consumption, and thus withdrawing less from circulation than he puts into it in goods. This is the only possible form for enriching oneself which is posited by circulation itself.

Self-denial could then also appear in the more active form, not posited in simple circulation, of denying himself more and more rest, thus sacrificing altogether his existence as distinct from his existence as worker, and being as much as possible only a worker; thus renewing the act of exchange more often, or extending it quantitatively further, in other words, by industriousness. Thus in present-day society, the demand for industriousness and especially also for saving, for self-denial, is addressed not to the capitalists but to the workers, and especially by the [11-27] capitalists. Present-day society makes the paradoxical demand that he for whom the object of exchange is means of subsistence should deny himself, not he for whom it is enrichment. The illusion as if the capitalists in fact practised "self-denial"—and thereby became capitalists—a de-



**[p. 215]**

(As regards the latter, even the economists concede that their real purpose is not wealth, but only a more appropriate distribution of expenditure, so that in old age, or in sickness, crises, etc., the workers do not become a burden on the poorhouses, on the State, or go begging (in a word, so that they become a burden on the working class itself and not by any means on the capitalists, vegetating on the latter's pocket); i.e. so that they save for the capitalists and reduce the costs of production for them.)

Still, not a single economist will deny that, if the workers acted on this demand in general, that is as workers (what the individual worker, in distinction from his genus, does or can do, can only exist as an exception, not as the rule, because it is not determined by the relationship itself), hence if they acted on this demand as a rule (apart from the damage they would do to general consumption— the loss would be enormous—therefore also to production, therefore also to the number and volume of exchanges that they could make with capital, therefore to themselves as workers), they would employ means which would absolutely negate their own end, and which would inevitably degrade them to the level of the Irish, to that level of wage labourers where the merest animal minimum of needs and means of subsistence appears as the sole object and purpose of their exchange with capital.

In aspiring to wealth instead of use value, the worker would not only not enrich himself but also lose the use value into the bargain. For as a rule the maximum of industriousness and of labour, and the minimum of consumption — and this amounts to the maximum of his self-denial and his money-making—could lead to nothing else than that he would receive a minimum of wages for a maximum of labour. By his exertion he would only have diminished the general level of the costs of production of his own labour and thereby its general price. It is only as an exception that the worker, by means of will-power, physical strength and endurance, parsimoniousness, etc., can convert his coin into money, as an exception from his class and from the general conditions of his existence.

If all or the majority are over-industrious (in so far as industriousness is left to their own discretion at all in modern

[^1]: 9*





**[p. 216]**

An individual worker can be industrious above the necessary level, more industrious than is necessary to live as a worker, only because another is below the level, is lazier. He can save only because and if another squanders. The most he can attain on average with his frugality is to be better able to endure the adjustment of prices—high and low, their circuit; that is only to distribute his enjoyments more appropriately, not to acquire wealth. And that is actually what the capitalists demand. The workers should save enough in times of good business to be able to more or less live in bad times, to endure SHORT TIME or the reduction of wages, etc. (The wage would then fall still lower.) It really amounts to the demand that they should always make do with a minimum of pleasures of life and make crises easier, etc., for the capitalists; that they should consider themselves as pure labouring machines, and pay as much as possible of their WEAR AND TEAR themselves. Apart from the sheer brutalisation to which this would lead—and this brutalisation would itself make it impossible even to strive for wealth in its general form, as money, as accumulated money—(and the worker's participation in higher, including spiritual, pleasures, agitation for his own interests, subscription to newspapers, attending lectures, educating his children, developing his taste, etc., his only share in civilisation, which distinguishes him from the slave, is economically possible only by his extension of the range of his enjoyments in times of good business, that is at the times when saving is possible to a certain degree)—apart from this, if he truly saved in this ascetic fashion, and so accumulated premiums for the Lumpenproletariat, the rogues, etc., whose number would grow in proportion to demand, he would merely be able to preserve his savings—if they went beyond the saving-boxes of the official savings banks, which pay him a minimum of interest so that the capitalists make a large interest on them or the State



**[p. 217]**

Moreover—in so far as the whole thing is not a hypocritical pretence of bourgeois "philanthropy", which in general consists in fobbing the workers off with "pious wishes"—each capitalist certainly demands that his workers should save, but only his own, because they confront him as workers; but by no means the remaining world of workers, because they confront him as consum- ers. IN SPITE of all "pious" phrases, he therefore tries to find all kinds of means to spur them on to consumption, to endow his commodities with new attractions, to talk the workers into feeling new needs, etc. It is precisely this aspect of the relationship between capital and labour which is an essential moment of civilisation, and upon which rests the historical justification but also the present power of capital. (This relationship between production and consumption is only to be developed later, under capital and profit, etc., or also under accumulation and competi- tion of capitals.)

These are nevertheless all exoteric considerations, relevant here in so far as the demands of hypocritical bourgeois philanthropy are shown to be self-negating and therefore to prove precisely what they are meant to refute: that in the exchange between the worker and capital, the worker finds himself in the relationship of simple circulation, therefore does not obtain wealth, but only subsistence, use values for immediate consumption. That the demand contradicts the relationship itself, emerges from the simple reflection (We shall deal with the demand, recently advanced occasionally with self-complacency, to give the workers a certain share in profit, in the section on the wages of labour; except as special bonus which can fulfil its purpose only as an exception to the rule, and which is IN FACT virtually restricted to the buying of individual OVERLOOKERS, etc., in the interest of the employer against that of their own class; or to [the employment of] salesmen, etc., in short no longer common workers, in which case it no longer affects the general relationship. Or it is a special way of cheating the workers and withholding part of their wages in the more precarious form of a profit depending on the state of the business.) that if the saving of the worker is not to remain a simple product of

If, then, in the original relation itself the object and the product of the exchange of the worker—as product of simple exchange it cannot be any other product—were not use value, subsistence, satisfaction of immediate needs, withdrawal from circulation of the equivalent put into it, in order to be destroyed by consumption — labour would confront capital not as labour, not as non-capital, but as capital. But capital, too, cannot confront capital, if it is not confronted by labour, for capital is capital only as non-labour, in this antithetical relation. Therefore the concept and relation of capital itself would be destroyed.

That there are conditions in which owners who themselves work exchange with one another is CERTAINLY not denied. But such conditions are not conditions of a society in which capital developed as such exists; they are everywhere destroyed, there- fore, by its development. Capital can posit itself as capital only by positing labour as non-capital, as pure use value.

(As a slave, the labourer has exchange value, a value; as a free worker, he has no value; only the right to dispose over his labour, acquired by exchange with him, has value. He does not confront the capitalist as exchange value, but the capitalist confronts him as exchange value. His valuelessness and devaluation is the prerequis- ite of capital and the condition for free labour in general. Linguet considers it a retrogression"; he forgets that the worker is thereby formally posited as a person who is something for himself apart from his labour, and who alienates what expresses his life [Lebensäusserung] only as a means for his own life.86 So long as the worker as such has exchange value, industrial capital as such cannot exist, therefore developed capital in general cannot exist. Labour must confront capital as pure use value, which is offered as a commodity by its owner himself in exchange for capital, in

[^1]: a [S. N. H. Linguet,] Theorie des loix civiles, ou Principes fondamentaux de la société, Vol. II, London, 1767, pp. 462-513.— Ed.





**[p. 219]**

The worker, then, is only in the relation of simple circulation, of simple exchange, and obtains only coin for his use value; subsistence; but mediated. This form of mediation is, as we have seen, essential for and characteristic of the relationship.3 That he can proceed to the conversion of his coin into money—savings— only proves that his relationship is that of simple circulation; he can save more or less; but beyond that he cannot go. He can realise his savings only by temporarily enlarging the range of his enjoyments. It is important—and it affects the determination of the relationship itself—that, as money is the product of his exchange, general wealth drives him on as an illusion; makes him industrious. At the same time, this not only formally provides scope for arbitrariness for the realisation [11-29]b

[In this exchange, the worker indeed receives money only as coin, i.e. only in the vanishing form of subsistence for which he exchanges it. Subsistence, not wealth, the purpose of the exchange for him.

The capacity to work has been called the capital of the worker, in so far as it is the fund which he does not consume in an individual exchange, since he can constantly repeat the exchange for the duration of his life as a worker. According to this, everything would be capital which is a fund of repeated0]

[III-8]87 processes of the same subject; e.g. the substance of the eye is the capital of sight, etc. Such belletristic phrases, which by means of some sort of analogy relate everything to everything else, may even appear profound when are said for the first time, and the more so the more they identify the most disparate things. If repeated, and especially if repeated complacently, as statements of

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 211-14.— Ed. b The last, 29th, page of Notebook II of the manuscript is missing. The contents of this page can be judged by reference to the following passage in the References Marx made in the summer of 1861 as a guide to the notebooks of his 1857-58 manuscript (see present edition, Vol. 29): "Capital confronts the worker only as power of things. Without personal worth. Distinction from service-rendering. The worker's aim in exchange with capital—consumption. Must keep starting afresh. Labeur as the worker's capital."—Ed.

[^2]: c The end of the missing page is restored according to the Economic Manuscript of 1861-63 (Notebook II-A), where Marx reproduced it. Further as on page 8 of Notebook III of the 1857-58 manuscript.

[^3]: Page 8 of Notebook III of the manuscript is marked: Chapter on Capital (continuation) (from Notebook II) (Last day of November) "29, 30 November and December".— Ed.



The fact that labour is always a new source of exchange for the worker so long as he is able to work—that is to say, not of any exchange but of exchange with capital—is inherent in the nature of the concept itself, namely that he sells only the temporary right to dispose over his labour capacity, hence can always begin the exchange anew as soon as he has absorbed the required amount of substances to be able to reproduce his life-activity. Instead of making this the object of their amazement—and telling the worker it is a great merit of capital he can live at all, that he can repeat certain life processes every day, as soon as he has slept and eaten sufficiently—these whitewashing sycophants of bourgeois political economy should rather have noted that after constantly repeated labour, the worker has only his living immediate labour to exchange. The repetition itself is IN FACT only apparent. What he exchanges with capital is his entire labour capacity which he spends in, SAY, 20 years. Instead of paying him for this at once, capital pays for it in instalments, as he puts it at the disposal of capital, say, in weekly instalments. This alters absolutely nothing in the nature of the matter and does not at all justify the conclusion that, because the worker must sleep for 10-12 hours before he is able to repeat his labour and his exchange with capital, labour constitutes his capital. What is IN FACT conceived of as capital here, is the limit on, the interruption of, his labour, the fact that he is not a perpetuum mobile. The struggle for the Ten Hours Bill,88 etc., proves that the capitalist desires nothing more than that the worker should expend his dosages of life power as much as possible without interruption.

We come now to the second process, which constitutes the relation between labour and capital after this exchange. We want to add here only that the political economists themselves express the above statement thus: wages are not productive. Productive for them, OF COURSE, means productive of wealth. Now, since wages are the product of exchange between worker and capital—and the only product that is posited in this act itself—they admit that the worker produces no wealth in this exchange, either for the capitalist, for whom the payment of money for a use value—and this payment forms the only function of capital in this relation- ship—is the giving up of wealth, not its creation, which is why he tries to pay as little as possible; or for the worker, because it

[^1]: a Simply.— Ed.





**[p. 221]**

produces for him only means of subsistence, satisfaction of individual needs, more or less—never the general form of wealth, never wealth. Nor can it, for the content of the commodity which he sells does not in any way place it above the general laws of circulation, under which the value he throws into circulation obtains him, by means of coin, an equivalent in another use value, which he consumes. Such an operation can OF COURSE never enrich, but must at the end of the process bring the operator back exactly to the point at which he was at its beginning. This does not, as we have seen,3 exclude but rather includes the possibility that the range of his immediate satisfactions may contract or expand to a certain extent. On the other hand, if the capitalist—who in this exchange is not even posited yet as capitalist but only as money—repeated this act again and again, his money would soon have been eaten up by the worker and he [III-9] would have squandered it in a series of Other satisfactions, patched trousers, polished boots,—in short, services received. In any case, the repetition of this operation would be measured exactly by the limit of his purse. It would not enrich him any more than the expenditure of money for other use values for his own beloved self, all of which, as is well known, do not bring in but cost money.

Seeing that in the relationship of labour and capital, and also in this first relationship of exchange between the two, the worker buys exchange value and the capitalist use value, in that labour confronts capital not as a use value but as use value pure and simple, it may seem peculiar that the capitalist should obtain wealth, and the worker only a use value which is extinguished in consumption. ^ I n so far as this concerns the capitalist, this is only to be developed in relation to the second process.^ This appears as a dialectic, which turns into the reverse of what would be expected. But looked at more closely, it becomes clear that the worker, who exchanges his commodity, goes through the form C—M—M—C in the process of exchange. If in circulation we start from the commodity, from use value as the principle of exchange, we necessarily arrive back at the commodity, in that money appears only as coin, and as means of exchange is only a vanishing mediator; but the commodity as such, after it has traversed its circuit, is consumed as a direct object of need. On the other hand, capital represents M—C—C—M; the antithetical moment.

The separation of property from labour appears as a necessary law

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 211-17.— Ed.



of this exchange between capital and labour. Labour as non-capital, posited as such, is:

(1) Not objectified labour, negatively conceived (itself still objective; the not-objective itself in objective [objectiver]a form). As such it is non-raw material, non-instrument of labour, non-raw product: labour separated from all means of labour and all objects of labour, from its whole objectivity [Objectivität]. Living labour existing as abstraction from these moments of its actual reality (likewise, non-value); this complete denudation, the purely subjec- tive existence of labour lacking all objectivity [Objectivität]. Labour as absolute poverty: poverty, not as shortage, but as a complete exclusion of objective wealth. Or also as the existing non-value and hence purely objective use value, existing without mediation, this objectivity can only be one not separated from the person; only one coincident with his immediate corporality. Since the objectivity is purely immediate, it is also immediately non-objectivity. In other words: not an objectivity falling outside the immediate existence of the individual himself.

(2) Not-objectified labour, non-value, positively conceived; or negativity relating itself to itself. As such it is not- objectified, therefore non-objective, i.e. subjective existence of labour itself. Labour not as object but as activity; not as itself value, but as the living source of value. General wealth, in contrast to capital, in which wealth exists objectively, as reality—general wealth as its general possibility, which [possibility] proves itself as such in activity. It is therefore no contradiction at all that labour is on the one hand absolute poverty as object, and on the other the general possibility of wealth as subject and activity, or rather these mutually wholly contradictory statements condition each other and follow from the essence of labour, as it is presupposed by capital as its opposite, as the antithetical existence of capital, and as, on the other hand, it, in its turn, presupposes capital.

The last point, to which attention still has to be paid concerning the relationship of labour to capital, is this: as use value as such confronting money posited as capital, it is not this or that labour, but labour pure and simple, abstract labour; absolutely indifferent to its particular determinateness, but capable of assuming any determi- nateness. Labour must of course correspond to the particular

[^1]: a Except for the cases where the German words objectiv or Objectivität (objective, objectivity as against subjective, subjectivity) is given in brackets, the English objective and its derivatives stand for words derived from the German

[^2]: Gegenstand (object, thing).— Ed.





**[p. 223]**

substance of which a particular capital consists as a particular labour; but since capital as such is indifferent to every particularity of its substance, and is both the totality of all its particularities as well as the abstraction from all of them, labour confronting capital has subjectively this same totality and abstraction in itself. E.g. in guild and craft labour, where capital itself still has an undeveloped form, is still completely immersed in a specific substance, hence is not yet capital as such, labour, too, appears as still immersed in its particular specificity; [appears] not in the totality and abstraction of labour as such as it confronts capital. That is to say, though labour is in every individual case a specific kind of labour, capital can confront any specific labour; the totality of all labour confronts it ôvvà|xeia and it is fortuitous which particular one confronts it at any particular time.

On the other hand, the worker himself is absolutely indifferent to the specificity of his labour; it has as such no interest for him, but only in so far as it is, in general, labour and is as such use value for capital. [Ill-10] To be the bearer of labour as such, i.e. of labour as use value for capital, is therefore the sum total of his economic character; he is worker in contrast to the capitalist. This is not the character of the artisan, guild-member, etc., whose economic character lies precisely in the specificity of their labour and their relation to a specific master, etc.

This economic relation—the character which capitalist and worker bear as the extremes of a relation of production—is therefore developed the more purely and adequately, the more labour loses all craft-like character, the more its particular skill becomes something abstract, irrelevant, and the more it becomes purely abstract, purely mechanical activity, hence irrelevant, indif- ferent to its particular form; the more it becomes merely formal activity or, what is the same, merely physical [stoffliche] activity, activity pure and simple, indifferent to its form. Here we have another example of how the particular specificity of the relation of production, of the category—here capital and labour—becomes real only with the development of a particular material mode of production and a particular stage of development of the industrial productive forces. (This point in general to be particularly developed in the context of this relation later, as it is already posited here in the relation itself, while in the case of the abstract determinations, exchange value, circulation, money, it is still more relevant to our subjective reflection.)

[^1]: a Potentially.— Ed.



Capital is money (exchange value posited for itself), but no longer money as in a particular substance and therefore excluded from the other substances of the exchange values existing alongside it, but obtaining its ideal determination in all substances, in exchange values representing every form and mode of existence of objectified labour. In so far as capital, as money existing in all particular forms of objectified labour, now enters the process with labour, not objectified labour but living labour, labour existing as process and action, it is initially in this qualitative difference of the substance in which it exists from the form, in which it now also exists as labour. It is in the process of this distinction and the transcendence of this distinction that capital itself becomes a process.

Labour is the yeast thrown into capital, bringing it now into fermentation. On the one hand, the objectivity in which capital exists must be processed, i.e. consumed by labour. On the other hand, the mere subjectivity of labour as pure form must be transcended, and it must be objectified in the material of capital. The relation of capital in accordance with its content to labour, of objectified labour to living labour—in this relation where capital appears as passive towards labour, it is its passive being, as a particular substance, that enters into relation with labour as

creative activity—can in general only be the relation of labour to its objectivity, its physical matter—(which must be dealt with already in the first chapter which must precede that on exchange value and must treat of production in general) — and with regard to labour as activity the physical matter, the objectified labour, has only two relations: that of the raiv material, i.e. of the formless physical matter, of mere material for the form-giving, purposive activity of labour; and that of the instrument of labour, of the means, itself objective, by which the subjective activity inserts an object as its conductor between itself and the object.

The determination as product, which the economists bring in here, does not yet belong here at all, as a determination distinct from raw material and instrument of labour. It appears as result, not as premiss of the process between the passive content of capital and labour as activity. As premiss, the product is not a relation of the object to labour different from raw material and instrument of labour, because raw material and instrument of labour, as they are the substance of values, are themselves objectified labour, products. The substance of value is in general not the particular natural substance, but objectified labour. This itself, [III-ll] in turn, appears in relation to living labour as raw material and instrument of labour. Considering the simple act of production in itself, the instrument of labour and the raw material may appear as already existing in nature, so that they only need to be appropriated, i.e. made into object and means of labour, which is not itself a process of labour. In relation to them, therefore, the product appears as something qualitatively different, and is a product not only as the result of labour applied by means of the instrument to the physical matter, but as the first objectification of labour alongside them. But as component parts of capital, raw material and instrument of labour are themselves already objectified labour, that is product.

This still does not exhaust the relationship. For, e.g. in production in which no exchange value at all exists, no capital therefore exists, the product of labour can become the means and object of new labour. For example, in agriculture producing purely for use value. The bow of the hunter, the net of the fisherman, in short the simplest conditions already presuppose the product which ceases to count as product and becomes raw material, or in particular instrument of production, for this is really the first specific form in which the product appears as means of reproduction. This relation therefore by no means exhausts the relationship in which raw material and instrument of labour make their appearance as moments of capital itself.



**[p. 226]**

The economists, incidentally, bring in the product as the third element of the substance of capital in quite a different connection as well. It is the product, in so far as it is destined to step outside both the process of production and circulation, and to be immediate object of individual consumption, approvisionnement, as Cherbuliez calls it.a That is to say, the products which are presupposed so that the worker lives as worker and is capable of living during production, before a new product is produced. That the capitalist possesses this capacity is posited in that each element of capital is money and as such can be transformed from itself as the general form of wealth into the physical matter of wealth, objects of consumption. The approvisionnement of the economists, therefore, applies only to the workers; i.e. it is the money expressed in the form of consumable objects, use value, which they receive from the capitalist in the act of exchange between the two [parties]. But this belongs in the first act [of the exchange]. How far this first act is related to the second, is not yet at issue here. The only diremption posited by the process of production itself is the original diremption, that posited by the distinction between objectified labour and living labour itself, i.e. that between raw material and instrument of labour. That the economists confuse these determinations is quite in order, since they must confuse the two moments of the relation between capital and labour and dare not fix the specific difference between them.

Thus: the raw material is consumed by being changed, formed by labour, and the instrument of labour is consumed by being used up in this process, worn out. On the other hand, labour is likewise consumed by being employed, set in motion and so a definite quantity of the muscular strength, etc., of the worker is spent, whereby he exhausts himself. But it is not merely consumed; at the same time, it is converted from the form of activity and fixed, materialised, into that of object, of rest; as change of object, it changes its own form and from activity becomes being. The end of the process is the product, in which the raw material appears as combined with labour, and in which the instrument of labour has likewise translated itself from mere possibility into reality, in that it has become the real conductor of labour, but thereby it has been consumed in its static form through its mechanical or chemical relation to the material of labour.

[^1]: a Cherbuliez used "approvisionnement" in the sense of "means of subsistence" (Richesse ou pauvreté, Paris, 1841, p. 16).— Ed.



All three moments of the process: material, instrument, labour, coincide in a neutral result: the product. In the product are at once reproduced the moments of the process of production which were consumed in it. The whole process therefore appears as productive consumption, i.e. as consumption which neither ends in nothing nor in the mere subjectification of the objective, but which, in turn, is itself posited as an object. The consumption is not a simple consumption of the physical matter, but consumption of consump- tion itself; in the transcendence of the physical matter, it is the transcendence of this transcendence, and hence the positing of the physical matter. The form-giving activity consumes the object and consumes itself, but it consumes the given form of the object only in order to posit it in a new objective form, and it consumes itself only in its subjective form as activity. It consumes the objectivity [das Gegenständliche] of the object—the indifference to form— and the subjectivity [das Subjektive] of the activity; forms the one, materialises the other. As product, however, the result of the process of production is use value.

[Ill-12] If we now consider the result so far obtained, we find: Firstly: By the appropriation, incorporation of labour into capital—money, i.e. the act of purchase of the right to dispose over the worker, appears here only as a means of bringing about this process, not as a moment of the process itself—capital begins to ferment and becomes a process, the process of production, in which it, as totality, as living labour, relates to itself not only as objectified, but—because objectified—as mere object of labour.

Secondly: In simple circulation, the substance of the commodity and of money was itself of no consequence for their formal character, i.e. in so far as commodity and money remained moments of circulation. The commodity, so far as its substance was concerned, fell outside the economic relationship as object of consumption (of need). Money, in so far as its form made itself independent, still related itself to circulation, but only negatively, and was only this negative relation. Fixed for itself, it was likewise extinguished in dead materiality, ceased to be money. Commodity and money were both expressions of exchange value and different only as general and particular exchange value. This difference itself was, in turn, only a notional one, in that both in real circulation the two determinations were exchanged, and each considered for itself changed its determination: money itself was a particular commodity and the commodity as price was itself general money. The difference was only formal. Each was posited



**[p. 228]**

Thirdly: It appeared as this relation still only in itself. The relation is not yet posited, or is initially posited only in the character of one of the two moments, that of the physical matter, which is in itself different as material (raw material and instrument) and form (labour), and as the relation of both, as real process, is itself again only a relation of physical matter—relation of the two physical elements which make up the content of capital distinct from its formal relation as capital.

If we consider capital from the aspect in which it originally appears distinct from labour, it is in the process only passive being, only objective being, in which the formal character which makes it capital—i.e. a social relationship existing for itself89—is completely extinguished. It enters the process only as content—as objectified labour in general; but the fact that it is objectified labour is completely indifferent to labour, and it is the relation of labour to capital which constitutes the process. Indeed, it is only as object, not as objectified labour, that it enters the process, that it is worked on. Cotton which becomes yarn, or yarn which is woven into cloth, or the cloth which becomes material for printing and dyeing, exist for labour only as already available cotton, yarn, cloth. In so far as they themselves are products of labour, are objectified labour, they do not enter into any process at all; they do so only as material existences with particular natural properties. How these have been posited in them does not concern the relation of living labour to them; for living labour they exist only in so far as they exist in distinction from it, i.e. as material for labour.

This, in so far as the point of departure is capital in its objective form as a prerequisite for labour. On the other hand, in so far as labour itself has become one of capital's objective elements through the exchange with the worker, its distinction from the objective elements of capital is itself only an objective one; the objective elements are in the form of rest, labour is in the form of activity. The relation is the physical one of one of its elements to the other; but not its own relation to both.

Capital appears therefore on the one hand only as passive object, in which all relation of form has been extinguished; it appears on the other hand only as simple process of production, in which capital



**[p. 229]**

Looked at from this side, [III-13] the process of capital coincides with the simple process of production as such, in which its character as capital is quitç as extinguished in the form of the process, as money was extinguished as money in the form of value. So far as we have considered this process up to this point, capital existing for itself, i.e. the capitalist, does not enter at all. It is not the capitalist who is consumed by labour as raw material and instrument of labour. Nor is it the capitalist who consumes, but labour. The process of production of capital thus does not appear as the process of production of capital but as the process of production pure and simple, and, in distinction from labour, capital appears only in its physical determination of raw material and instrument of labour. It is this aspect—which is not merely an arbitrary abstraction but an abstraction vanishing in the process itself—which the economists seize upon in order to represent capital as a necessary element of every process of production. Of course, they only do this by forgetting to pay attention to its behaviour as capital during this process.

Here is the place to draw attention to a moment which here, for the first time, arises not only from the standpoint of observation but is posited in the economic relationship itself. In the first act, in the exchange between capital and labour, labour as such, existing for itself, necessarily appeared as the worker. Similarly here in the second process: capital in general is posited as value existing for itself, as egotistic value, so to speak (something which was only aspired to in money). But capital existing for itself is the capitalist. Of course, socialists say: we need capital, but not the capitalist.90

Capital then appears as a pure thing, not as relationship of production, which, reflected in itself, is precisely the capitalist. I can indeed separate capital from this individual capitalist and it can pass on to another one. But when the former loses his capital, he loses the quality of being a capitalist. Capital is therefore quite separable from an individual capitalist, but not from the capitalist who as such confronts the worker. In the same way the individual worker can cease to be the being-for-itself of labour; he can inherit money, steal, etc. But then he ceases to be a worker. As

