---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "9. K. Marx and F. Engels. Parliamentary and Military Affairs "
Page_Range: "71-74"
---

# 9. K. Marx and F. Engels. Parliamentary and Military Affairs 



**[p. 40]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

PARLIAMENTARY AND MILITARY AFFAIRS

41»

London, February 20. Although the House of Commons sat yesterday from 4 p. m. to 2 a. m. and voted away some £7.5 million sterling for the army, the debates lacked anything interesting enough to report. Therefore, we shall only note that Palmerston disconcerted his liberal opponents both by the deliberate triviality of his replies and by the provocatively confident insolence with which he delivered these trivialities.3

Having declaimed about the battle of Balaklava37 in the manner of Astley's Amphitheatre, he attacked Layard for "vulgar declama- tion against the aristocracy", for it was not the aristocracy that was dug-in in the Commissariat, in Transport and in the Medical department. He forgot that its lackeys are dug-in there. Layard rightly emphasised that the commissions invented by Palmerston are good for nothing but stirring up conflicts of competence in the expeditionary army. "What!" cried Palmerston (he saw himself again in the place of Richard II and Parliament in the role of Wat Tyler's mob). "You want to set up a parliamentary committee good for nothing but producing Blue Books,38 and you take exception to my commissions, which 'have to work'!" Palmerston treated Parliament with such superciliousness that for once he even found it superfluous to make his own jokes. He borrowed them from the ministerial morning papers which the Members of Parliament had in front of them on the table. They were spared neither the "Committee of Public Safety" of The Morning

[^1]: An account of Palmerston's speech was published in The Times, No. 21982, February 20, 1855.— Ed





**[p. 41]**

Chronicle* nor the jibe of The Morning Post about transporting the inquisitorious Members to the Crimea—and leaving them there. Only a parliament constituted like this one could have stood for this.

So, while in Parliament Palmerston out-Aberdeens Old Aber- deen, he lets it be known—not directly, through his own papers, but through the gullible newspaper of the united victuallers,b that he is not a free agent but bound in chains by the Court, etc.

As a peace congress39 is soon to meet in Vienna, it is time to speak of the war and to estimate the military forces at the disposal of the powers which have so far appeared — more or less—on the battlefield. This is not a question only of the numerical strength of the armies, but of that part of them which can be used in offensive operations. We shall give details only of the infantry, as the other arms must be proportionate.0

England possesses, in all, 99 regiments, or 106 battalions of infantry. Of these, at least 35 battalions are on Colonial service. Of the remainder, the first five divisions sent to the Crimea took up 40 battalions more; and at least eight battalions have been sent since as reinforcements. There remain about 23 battalions, hardly one of which could be spared for service abroad. The militia, embodied to the number of over 50,000, are allowed to volunteer for foreign service. They are to occupy Gibraltar, Malta, Corfu, and thus to relieve about twelve battalions, which then may be sent to the Crimea. A foreign legion, as Palmerston stated in the House of Commons yesterday, will not be set up. Finally, on the 13th February, orders were issued to create second battalions for 93 regiments—43 of 1,000 men and 50 of 1,200 men each. This would give an addition of 103,000 men, besides about 17,000 more men for the cavalry and artillery. But not one of these 120,000 men has as yet been enlisted, and afterwards they have to be drilled and officered.

The admirable organisation existing at present has contrived to employ almost the whole of the infantry—with the exception of depot companies and a few depot battalions—between the Crimea and the colonies, and moreover not only the men but, though this

[^1]: a The Morning Chronicle, No. 27504, February 19, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: The Morning Advertiser, which had published the articles "A Minister must be ambitious" (No. 19863, February 17, 1855) and "Faithful are the wounds of a friend", No. 19864, February 19, 1855.—£d.

[^3]: c The following paragraphs are largely based on Engels' article "The War That Looms on Europe", which was published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4332, March 8, 1855 (see this volume, pp. 32-39).— Ed.



seems incredible, the cadres as well. Now, there are plenty of half-pay generals, colonels and majors on the British army list and they can be employed for this new force. But there are hardly any captains on half-pay, and no lieutenants and non-commissioned officers at all. But it is well known that the non-commissioned officers form the cornerstone of every army. According to General Sir William Napier, the historian of the Peninsular war,3 the best authority in this field, it takes fully three years to drill the "tag-rag" and "bobtail"b (the lumpenproletariat) of Old England into "the best blood of England", "the first soldiers of the world". If that is the case when the cadres are at hand and need only to be replenished, how long will it therefore take to manufacture heroes out of these 120,000 men? During the next twelvemonth, the utmost the British Government can do is to keep up a "heroic little band" of fifty thousand men before the enemy. That number could be exceeded for short periods, but only at the cost of considerably upsetting all preparation for future reinforcements. The departure of the mail compels us to break off at this point.

Written on February 20, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 91, February 23, 1855 Published in English for the first time Marked with the sign X

[^1]: This refers to W. F. P. Napier's History of the War in the Peninsula and in the South of France from the Year 1807 to the Year 1814, Vols. I-VI.— Ed

[^2]: The words in quotation marks are given in English in the original.— Ed



