---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "11. K. Marx. Joseph Hume "
Page_Range: "78-80"
---

# 11. K. Marx. Joseph Hume 



**[p. 47]**

Karl Marx

[JOSEPH] HUME

London, February 24. With Hume, the veteran of the House of Commons has died. His long parliamentary life was an accurate barometer of the radical bourgeois party which reached its highest point in 1831. In the initial period of the reformed House45 a kind of parliamentary Warwick or Member-maker, eight years later he figured with Daniel O'Connell and Feargus O'Connor as one of the originators of the People's Charter,46 which to this day forms the political programme of the Chartists and basically contains only the demand for a universal franchise together with the conditions which would make it a reality in England.

The break between the workers and the bourgeois agitators which soon followed found Hume on the side of the latter. At the time of the Russell Ministry he drafted the "Little Charter", which was adopted by the so-called "parliamentary and financial reformers" 47 as their programme. Instead of the six points of the People's Charter it contains three points and replaces the "universal" franchise by a more or less "enlarged" franchise.3

Finally, in 1852, Hume proclaimed a new programme in which he even abandoned his "Little Charter" and demanded only one point: elections by ballot.b For the rest, Hume was the classical representative of the so-called "independent" opposition, which Cobbett aptly and exhaustively described as the "safety-valve" of the old system. In his last days the habit of proposing motions and

[^1]: Hume's speech in the House of Commons on June 20, 1848. Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, third series, Vol. XCIX, London, 1848.— Ed.

[^2]: Hume's speech in the House of Commons on March 25, 1852. Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, third series, Vol. CXX, London, 1852.— Ed.





**[p. 48]**

then, just before the closure, at the nod of a minister, withdrawing them again, became a veritable mania with him. His flirting with "economising public funds" had become proverbial. Each Ministry allowed him to fight and reduce minor items so as to get the big ones the more safely through the House.

Written on February 24, 1855 Printed according to the newsi - i - i • p a p e r First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 98, February 28, 1855 Published in English for the first time Marked with the sign X

