---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "27. K. Marx. Reports from the English Press "
Page_Range: "133-135"
---

# 27. K. Marx. Reports from the English Press 



**[p. 102]**

Karl Marx

REPORTS FROM THE ENGLISH PRESS

London, March 20. The Duke of Newcastle has ordered the recall of Lord Lucan; Lord Panmure has published Raglan's letter attacking him, and Lord Hardinge, the fabulous Lord High Constable of the British Army, has refused him an investigation and a military tribunal. In spite of the opposition of two ministries, of the Commander-in-Chief in the Crimea and of the Commander of the Horse Guards a in London, Lord Lucan proved in a detailed speech in the House of Lords yesterday that not he, but Raglan alone was responsible for the sacrifice of the Light Brigade at Balaklava93 and that the Aberdeen and Palmerston Ministries had sacrificed Lord Lucan to the displeased public in order to save the obedient, feeble-minded and tractable Comman- der in the Crimea. The public monster had to be satisfied. A half-completed letter found on the body of General Cathcart addressed to his wife and dated November 2, three days before the battle of Inkerman M and a week after the charge of the Light Brigade at Balaklava, is decisive on this question. This letter says word for word:

In an article on the Vienna Conference,95 The Times today makes the characteristic comment that should the Congress become a reality, the main difficulties were [to be] expected from the Turkish side.0 Within the framework of the four points the main

[^1]: "Neither Lord Lucan nor Lord Cardigan was to blame, but on the contrary, for they obeyed orders."

[^2]: Marx uses the English expression "Horse Guards". The designation "Commander of the Horse Guards" referred to the Commander-in-Chief of the British army (see footnote on p. 24 of this volume).— Ed.

[^3]: Cathcart's letter was quoted by Lucan in the House of Lords on March 19, 1855. The Times, No. 22006, March 20, 1855.— Ed.

[^4]: "The Conferences at Vienna were opened in due form", The Times, No. 22006, March 20, 1855.— Ed.





**[p. 11]**

concessions would have to be extorted from the Sultan, not from the Tsar.a

Yesterday The Times mystified its public yet again with the "authentic" announcement that the great bombardment and final storming of Sevastopol had undoubtedly taken place before March 19.b Whence this sudden turn from desperate hopelessness to sanguine superstition? The Times began its Crimean campaign against the overthrown coalition and its " ceterum censed"c that a Committee of Inquiry was necessary at the very moment that Gladstone threatened its monopoly by the proposal to abolish the stamp duty and to limit the weight of newspapers that can be sent for one penny by post to four ounces — less than the weight of one copy of The Times. No sooner was Gladstone overthrown, than his successor, Sir George Cornewall Lewis withdrew the Bill, and The Times, hoping that everything would remain as before, suddenly transformed its bilious view of the Crimea into a mobile panorama, radiant with hope of success, in which even the army, whose obituary it published three months ago, has become active again. Today its view is again darkened, because yesterday Sir George Cornewall Lewis, against all expectations, himself brought in a Bill to abolish the newspaper stamp duty. The animosity of a writer of retrospective reviews to fresh news! The Times ejaculates. Lewis as everybody knows was editor of The Edinburgh Review.

We shall return to the Bill as soon as the details are laid before the House of Commons, but meanwhile note that it is a concession to the Manchester School96 which retains the merit of having untiringly agitated for the introduction of free competition in the field of the press. The concession of the Palmerston Ministry to the Manchester School is a captatio benevolentiaed in case of the dissolution of the Lower House and new elections.

[^1]: Written on March 20, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 139, March 23, 1855 Published in English for the first time Marked with the sign X

[^2]: a Abdul Mejid, Alexander II.— Ed. b The Times, No. 22005, March 19, 1855.— Ed. c Something constantly repeated. The phrase derives from the famous dictum with which, after 157 B.C., Cato the Elder concluded every speech: "Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam" (For the rest I take the view that Carthage must be destroyed).— Ed.

[^3]: An attempt to curry favour.— Ed.



