---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "47. K. Marx. The Morning Post versus Prussia.- The Character of the Whigs and Tories "
Page_Range: "217-220"
---

# 47. K. Marx. The Morning Post versus Prussia.- The Character of the Whigs and Tories 



**[p. 186]**

Karl Marx

THE MORNING POST VERSUS PRUSSIA. — THE CHARACTER OF THE WHIGS AND TORIES149

London, May 14. Palmerston's private organ, The Morning Post, today carries a threatening article against Prussia,3 which includes the following:

"It was in the month of April, 1854, that permission was given, by an Order in Council, to import Russian produce into the United Kingdom in neutral bottoms, and of this permission we find that Prussia availed herself with astonishing rapidity. The following returns" (taken from official tables presented to Parliament) "will show the comparative amount of our imports of tallow, hemp, and flax, from the last-named country, during the years 1853 and 1854; the difference clearly indicating'the quantity of Russian produce which has found its way through Memel and Danzig to the British market, notwithstanding our strict blockade of the Russian ports in the Baltic:

[^1]: "Imported from Prussia into the United Kingdom

[^2]: 1853 1854

[^3]: Tallow 54 cwts 253,955 cwts Hemp 3,447 " 366,220 " Flax 242,383 " 667,879 " Flax-and linseed 57,848 qrs 116,267 qrs

[^4]: "These figures sufficiently indicate the value of this new traffic to Prussia []. The result is that in spite of our blockade Russia is enabled to sell her produce as freely as in time of peace, while we have to pay some 50 per cent more for it, in the shape of dues and profits to the Prussian trader [].We admit that our present policy is grossly inconsistent, but the remedy is to be sought not by raising the blockade of the enemy's ports, but by stopping to the utmost of our power the overland traffic through the Prussian dominions."

[^5]: a The Morning Post, No. 25386, May 14, 1855.— Ed. The Morning Post has: "the enemy's ports".— Ed.





**[p. 187]**



[^1]: a A. H. Layard's speech in the House of Commons on April 27, 1855. The Times, No. 22040, April 28, 1855.—Ed. b E. L. Ellenborough's speech in the House of Lords on May 14, 1855. The Times, No. 22054, May 15, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: See this volume, pp. 50-51.— Ed. Marx uses the English word.— Ed.





**[p. 188]**



[^1]: Written on May 14, 1855

[^2]: First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 227, May 18, 1855

[^3]: Marked with the sign X

[^4]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^6]: Upper crust.— Ed. New men.— Ed.



