---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "48. K. Marx. A Sitting of the House of Lords "
Page_Range: "220-225"
---

# 48. K. Marx. A Sitting of the House of Lords 



**[p. 189]**

Karl Marx

A SITTING OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS

London, May 15. The galleries of the House of Lords were packed full yesterday afternoon before the sitting even com- menced. A sensational show had been announced—Lord Ellen- borough's motion, and a regular battle between the Ins and Outs.a

In addition to this, it was piquant to see with one's own eyes the hereditary legislators playing the part of crusaders against the aristocracy. The performance was a poor one. The actors kept forgetting what parts they were playing. The play began as drama and ended in farce. During the mock-battle not even the illusion, the artistic illusion, was maintained. It was evident at first glance that the noble warriors were trying reciprocally to preserve not only themselves but even their weapons unscathed.

Insofar as the debate revolved around the criticism of the conduct of the war up to now it failed to rise to the level of any run-of-the mill debating clubh in London, and it would be sheer waste of time to dwell on it for a moment. We will attempt, however, to indicate in a few strokes how the noble lords conducted themselves as the champions of administrative reform, as the opponents of the aristocratic monopoly of government and as an echo of the City meetings. The right man in the right place, cried Lord Ellenborough.c And as proof that honour falls to merit, and merit alone, he cited the fact that he (Ellenborough) and Lord

[^1]: Marx uses the English words "Ins" and "Outs" (referring to the party in the government and the opposition).— Ed.

[^2]: Here and below Marx uses the English words "debating club".— Ed. The debate in the House of Lords on May 14, 1855 was repoited in The Times, No. 22054, May 15, 1355.— Ed.





**[p. 190]**



[^1]: Marx uses the English term.— Ed. Marx uses the English words "special jury".— Ed. "Honest and free juries." — Ed.

[^2]: Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed.





**[p. 191]**

His friend Derby strove to restrict even the purely rhetorical concession. He rejected the rumour that he had allied himself with Layard. He whose entire talent consists of discretion, accused Layard of indiscretion. There was, he said, a lot of truth in the views of the City men, but they had proceeded to draw extravagant (!!) conclusions. A minister had to seek his colleagues in Parliament, and not merely in Parliament but in the party to which he belongs, and not merely in this party but within the circle of men in his party possessing parliamentary influence.

[^1]: Marx uses the English term.— Ed. Slip of the tongue.— Ed. c Don Quixote.— Ed.





**[p. 192]**

Lord Panmure, on behalf of the ministry, brought the Lords debate back to the real point. You want, he stuttered, to exploit the cry outside the walls of Parliament in order to declaim us out of office and put yourselves in. Why did Derby not form a ministry three months ago when charged to do so by the Queen? Ah, replied Derby with a smirk, three months ago! Things have changed in the last three months. Three months ago Lord Palmerston was l'homme à la mode,h the great and indispensable statesman. Palmerston has discredited himself, and now it's our turn.

The debate in the House of Lords has shown that neither side possesses the stuff that men are made of. As to the House of Commons, Ellenborough rightly observed that it has become insipid, that it has lost its credit and that political influence is no longer to be sought within the House, but outside it.

The debates in the Lords clearly showed the mala fidesc of the aristocratic opposition, which intends to conjure away the bourgeois movement and simultaneously to use it as a battering- ram against the ministry. In a subsequent letter we shall have the opportunity of similarly demonstrating the mala fides of the City reformers towards the working class, with whom they intend to play just as the aristocratic opposition does with them. From this one may draw the conclusion that the present movement in

[^1]: Here and below Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. A popular man.— Ed. Insincerity.— Ed.





**[p. 193]**

England is extremely complex and, as we have indicated earlier,3

simultaneously contains two antithetical and hostile movements.

Written on May 15, 1855 Printed according to the news First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, paper No. 228, May 19, 1855 Published in English for the first

Marked with the sign x t i m e

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 186-88.— Ed.



