---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "50. K. Marx. Questions of Finance "
Page_Range: "229-232"
---

# 50. K. Marx. Questions of Finance 



**[p. 198]**

Karl Marx

QUESTIONS OF FINANCE

London, May 19. According to the optimists of the press here the economic crisis in England has now ended, and commerce and industry are once again taking an upward course. They draw this consoling conclusion from the fact that there has been an easing of the money market. For on the one hand there has been an increase in the gold reserve in the vaults of the Bank of England, and on the other the bank has lowered its rate of interest. Whilst on January 20, 1855, the value of the gold holdings was only £12,162,000, on May 12, 1855, it had risen to £16,045,000—an increase of £3,883,000. The rate of interest, which stood at 5 per cent on January 20, 1855, was lowered by the Bank to 4l/2 per cent on March 31, and to 4 per cent on April 28. However, those gentlemen have overlooked the fact that an accumulation of gold in the vaults of the Bank and a fall in its rate of interest can be caused by something other than an economic boom—namely the very opposite: stagnation of business and, linked with that, a falling-off in the demand for capital. That the latter is really the cause on this occasion is shown by the tables published every week by the Bank of England. Only one should not, like those optimists, look exclusively at two columns contained in the tables, gold holdings and rate of interest. One has to compare two other columns—those showing reserve bank-notes and discounted bills. As is generally known, the Bank of England is split into two different departments, the Issue Department3 and the Banking Department. We can describe the former as the mint of the Bank of England. It is engaged solely in manufacturing bank-notes. Robert Peel's Act

[^1]: Here and below Marx uses the English terms.— Ed.





**[p. 199]**

Seeing, as we have, that, from January 20, 1855, to May 12, 1855, the gold holdings of the Bank increased by £3,883,000, we also find that during the same period the quantity of bank-notes held in reserve rose from £5,463,000 to £9,417,000, i. e. by £3,954,000. The greater the quantity of reserve bank-notes, i. e. the notes left in the coffers of the Banking Department, the smaller is the quantity of notes actually circulating amongst the public. However, from the figure just quoted it follows that the



**[p. 200]**



[^1]: Written on May 19, 1855

[^2]: First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 233, May 22, 1855

[^3]: Marked with the sign X

[^4]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



