---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "52. K. Marx. On the Reform Movement "
Page_Range: "239-242"
---

# 52. K. Marx. On the Reform Movement 



**[p. 208]**

Karl Marx

ON THE REFORM MOVEMENT

London, May 21. Today all the London newspapers publish an address from the City reformers, or rather their executive committee, to the "People of England".3 The style of the document is dry, businesslike, not quite as lofty as that of the trade circulars that periodically emanate from the same source, offering for sale coffee, tea, sugar, spices and other products of the tropical countries in a more or less tastefully arranged fabric of phrases. The Association15 promises to provide the material for a veritable physiology of the various government departments and to disclose all the mysteries of Downing Street,0 Downing Street which is full of hereditary wisdom. This is what it promises. For its own part, it demands that the electoral districts of England send to Parliament candidates freely chosen according to their hearts' desire and recommended solely by merit, instead of, as hitherto, imposed on them by the aristocratic clubs. It thus recognises the existing privileged electoral districts as normal, the selfsame districts which, in their corruptibility, their reliance on a few clubs, their lack of independence, it admits to being the birthplace of the present House of Commons, and thus of the present government. It does not want to dissolve these exclusive districts, nor to extend them, but simply to moralise. Why not then appeal directly to the conscience of the oligarchy itself, instead of threatening it with the abolition of its privileges? It should at any rate be an easier job to convert the oligarchical heads than the oligarchical electoral

[^1]: Excerpts from this address were later published in The People's Paper, No. 160, May 26, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: b The Administrative Reform Association (see this volume, pp. 166-69).— Ed. 10 Downing Street is the British Prime Minister's official residence.— Ed.





**[p. 209]**



[^1]: The reference is to D. M. Evans' pamphlet The City; or, the Physiology of London Business, published anonymously. Marx quotes a passage from it in Volume III of Capital.— Ed.





**[p. 210]**

Written on May 21, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung,

No. 237, May 24, 1855

Marked with the sign x

[^1]: Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed.



