---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "53. K. Marx. A Critique of the Crimean Affair.- From Parliament "
Page_Range: "242-246"
---

# 53. K. Marx. A Critique of the Crimean Affair.- From Parliament 



**[p. 211]**

Karl Marx

A CRITIQUE OF THE CRIMEAN AFFAIR.— FROM PARLIAMENT

London, May 23. The menacing discontent in the allied Army and Navy outside Sevastopol caused by the recall of the Kerch expedition has found an echo, if only a weak, faint one, in the London press. People are beginning to fear that the unity and artistic course of the war drama in the Crimea are threatened less by the Russians than by the presumptuous and capricious intervention of a deus ex machina,* the military genius of Napo- leon III. The exhibition of this genius in the well-known strategic didactical "essay" in the Moniteurb is in fact anything but soothing and reassuring. Until now, however, the distance between the theatre of war and the Tuileries has provided a kind of guarantee against actual interference by the military dilettantism of Paris. Now submarine telegraph has eliminated the distances, and with the distances the guarantee, and John Bull, who is wont to call himself "the most thinking people of the world",c is beginning to reflect, to grumble and complain that the British Army and Navy are expected to furnish the corpus viled for the inherited and providentially existing "military genius", to perform his experiments on.

[^1]: Literally "a god from a machine" (in the ancient Greek and Roman theatre, actors playing gods appeared on the stage with the help of machinery); in a figurative sense, a person or event that appears suddenly and solves a difficult situation.— Ed.

[^2]: This refers to the leading article "Paris, le 10 avril. Expédition d'Orient", published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 101, April 11, 1855. The article contained Napoleon Ill's instructions to Marshal Saint-Arnaud. For a critique of it see this volume, pp. 146-50.— Ed.

[^3]: Marx uses the English words.— Ed.

[^4]: Literally "worthless body".— Ed.



Meanwhile the heroes improvised for the purpose of the coup d'état wear out with incredible rapidity. The array was headed by Espinasse, who after his ignominious campaign in the Dobrudja160

was forced by the Zouaves to retreat head over heels to Paris. This Espinasse is the same man who, after being entrusted with guarding the building of the National Assembly, handed it over to its enemies.161 The second in the line of descent was Leroy, alias Saint-Arnaud, the War Minister of December 2. He was followed by Forey, so bold in the persecution of the unfortunate peas- ants of south-east France, and so considerately humane towards the Muscovites. The army's suspicion that he was revealing the se- crets of the French Council of War to the Russians made it neces- sary to remove him from the Crimea to Africa. Finally Canrobert was demoted on account of notorious incompetence. The irony of history has appointed Pélissier as his successor, and thus more or less commander-in-chief of the Anglo-French army—the same Pélissier of whom in 1841 it was asserted over and over again in Parliament, in London officers' clubs and at country-meetings,6 in The Times and in Punch, that no honourable English officer could

[^1]: a "Siege of Sebastopol", The Morning Herald, No. 22438, May 23, 1855.— Ed. War-horse.— Ed. See this volume, p. 137.— Ed.

[^2]: An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's book Des idées napoléoniennes published in Paris in 1839.— Ed.

[^3]: Marx uses the English words "country-meetings".— Ed.





**[p. 213]**

The Ministry suffered a defeat in the Commons yesterday, which proves nothing except that Parliament occasionally avenges itself on the Ministers for the scorn it enjoys "out of doors".b A certain Mr. Wise tabled the motion, that

"it is the opinion of this House that complete revision of our diplomatic establishments recommended in the report of the Select Committee of 1850 on Official Salaries should be carried into effect".c

Mr. Wise is a friend of Palmerston. His motion has been drifting about on the agenda of the House for about two years without coming up for discussion. Chance yesterday cast it before the discontented Commons. Wise made his speech, thinking that, after a few remarks by Palmerston, he would be able to play the usual game and withdraw his motion. But in contravention of the agreement Mr. Baillie picked up the motion that Wise had dropped and it was carried, despite Wise and Palmerston, by a majority of 112 to 57. This defeat did not in the least worry an old experienced tactician like Palmerston for he knows that in order to preserve an appearance of independence the House must occasionally condemn a ministerial motion to death and promote an anti-ministerial motion to life. Disraeli's motion, on the other hand, had the effect of an electric shock on the ministerial benches.162 Palmerston himself, a master at parliamentary play- acting, congratulated "the writers and actors of this unforgettable scene". This was not irony. It was the involuntary tribute of an artist to his rival when the latter beats him at his own game. In the Monday sittingd Palmerston had toyed so skilfully with Milner

[^1]: a Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. Marx uses the English words.— Ed. c Wise's motion in the House of Commons and the following debate were reported in The Times, No. 22061, May 23, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: d May 21, 1855.— Ed.





**[p. 214]**



[^1]: Written on May 23, 1855

[^2]: First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 241, May 26, 1855

[^3]: Marked with the sign x

[^4]: Printed according to the news- paper

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a May 24, 1855.— Ed.



