---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "71. K. Marx and F. Engels. The Local War.- Debate on Administrative Reform.- Report of the Roebuck Committee, etc "
Page_Range: "318-323"
---

# 71. K. Marx and F. Engels. The Local War.- Debate on Administrative Reform.- Report of the Roebuck Committee, etc 



**[p. 287]**

Karl Marx and Frederick Engels

THE LOCAL WAR.— DEBATE ON ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM.— REPORT OF THE ROEBUCK COMMITTEE, ETC.210

London, June 20. The local war proclaimed by Bonaparte in the Constitutionnel3 is a war in the Black Sea, and its purpose is the destruction of the alleged Russian supremacy in the Black Sea—a supremacy, moreover, that has never stood the test at sea, not even against the Turks. What is the state of affairs at the moment? The whole coast, from Constantinople to the Danube on one side and right round the Circassian shores to Balaklava and Eupatoria, has been snatched out of the hands of the Russians. Only Kaffa and Sevastopol are still holding out, with the former hard-pressed and the latter so situated that it will have to surrender as soon as it is seriously threatened. And more. The fleets are carrying out mopping-up operations in the inland sea of Azov, their light ships penetrate as far as Taganrog and every important place is bombarded by them. No part of the coast remains in Russian hands except the stretch from Perekop to the Danube, approxi- mately Vis of their possessions on this coast. Supposing Kaffa and Sevastopol also fall, and the Crimea is under the control of the allies, then what? Russia will not conclude peace, as it has already proclaimed. It would be madness. It would be tantamount to giving up a battle after the vanguard has been repulsed, at the very moment that the main force is entering the battlefield. What remains for the allies to do? We are told they can destroy Odessa, Kherson, Nikolayev. They can go ahead and land a strong army at Odessa, fortifying it against any number of Russians and then

[^1]: a A reference to A. de Cesena's article on the aims and prospects of the Crimean war published in the semi-official Constitutionnel, No. 169, June 18, 1855.— Ed.





**[p. 288]**





**[p. 289]**

nes"'d under the restored Empire have been surpassed by the transformation of the Napoleonic war against Russia into a "local war".

In the debate on administrative reform, to be resumed this evening, the amendment moved by Bulwer on behalf of the Tories gave the government the opportunity of defeating the "administratives" by a majority of 7 to l.212 What characterised the whole debate was its junior civil-servant nature, which it failed to transcend for a moment. Details of favouritism and nepotism, investigations as to the "best type of examination", resentment at merit neglected — everything was petty and pusillanimous. One seemed to be listening to a written complaint from an assistant gamekeeper to a

[^1]: An allusion to Louis Bonaparte's book Des idées napoléoniennes, which was published in Paris in 1839.— Ed.

[^2]: 11—3754



In their earlier agitation the English bourgeoisie took the ruling caste by surprise and drew the masses behind them as a chorus, by vastly overstating their real purpose in their programme. This time the programme does not even venture to rise to the height of the real purpose. One after the other you assure us that you do not seek the fall of the aristocracy but simply want to patch up the government machine in friendship with us! Very well!c Friendship for friendship! We are willing to reform the administration for you—within its traditional limits, of course. "Administrative reform" is not a matter of conflict between the classes as you assert. It is simply a question of the "issue", of "well-intentioned" reforms. As initial evidence of your good intentions we ask you to leave the details to us, and it is only a matter of details. We ourselves must know best how far we can go without jeopardising our class, without administrative reform inadvertently becoming a matter of conflict between the classes and forfeiting its philan- thropic character. The reforming bourgeoisie are obliged to acquiesce in this ironic language of aristocratic bonhomie because they themselves speak a fraudulent language to the masses. The aristocracy, ministry and opposition, Whigs and Tories were never mistaken about the relationship of the Administrative Reformers to the masses. They knew that the agitation had failed before it had even had a chance to be produced in Parliament. And how could they have been mistaken? Although the Reform Association admitted selected guests only to its Drury Lane meeting, although its audience was sifted twice and thrice, their fear of a popular motion, or even simply an unorthodox speech, was so excessive that the chairmand declared at the opening of the meeting that the audience was only there to "listen to the addresses of the speakers announced in the programme", no "resolutions" would be put to the vote, therefore "no amendments could be moved", and "no addition could be made to the list of set speakers". Agitation

[^1]: Up his sleeve.— Ed. Gladstone's speech was made on June 15, 1855 and the speeches by Disraeli and Palmerston on June 18. The Times, Nos. 22082 and 22084, June 16 and 19, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed.

[^3]: S. Morley. For a description of the meeting see this volume, p. 274.— Ed.





**[p. 291]**

The report of the Roebuck committee which was read out in the Commons the day before yesterday envelops its points in a broad, feeble gush of words.3 It contains timidly formulated criticism of the various departments, such as Ordnance, the Commissariat, the Medical Department, etc. It condemns Palmerston for his manage- ment of the militia, and the entire coalition ministry for the heedless frivolity with which it undertook the Sevastopol expedi- tion. As during the examination of witnesses the committee scrupulously avoided inquiring into the fundamental reasons for the stupendous calamities, it is only natural that in the report, too, it is obliged to keep the balance between quite general criticism of the political heads and petty, detailed faulting of the administra- tive machinery. On the whole the committee has fulfilled its purpose of acting as a safety-valve for the pressure of public passions.

The daily papers have let out a cry of indignation at the "dastardly murders" by the Russians at Hangö.213 The fact that ships sailing under flags of truce have been misused by the British for taking soundings with a plummet and spying out Russian positions, e.g. at Sevastopol and Odessa, is, however, admitted by The Morning Chronicled

[^1]: Written on June 20, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 287, June 23, 1855 Published in English for the first

[^2]: i i i i • t i m e Marked with the sign X

[^3]: a "State of the Army before Sebastopol", The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855.— Ed.

[^4]: This refers to a Letter to the Editor signed R.G.A. published in The Morning Chronicle, No. 27607, June 20, 1855.—Ed.



