---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "73. K. Marx. The Mishap of June 18.- Reinforcements "
Page_Range: "328-333"
---

# 73. K. Marx. The Mishap of June 18.- Reinforcements 



**[p. 297]**

Karl Marx

THE MISHAP OF JUNE 18.—REINFORCEMENTS

London, June 23. June 18, the anniversary of the battle of Waterloo,219 was of course not celebrated in London this year. It was to be celebrated in the Crimea with a victory, not over the French but alongside the French. The event seemed all the more piquant since Raglan, Wellington's famulus, was carrying out his command more or less under the orders of a General of Napoleon III.a The inscription was ready, only the event that it was to immortalise failed to happen. It will not escape people's notice that in the history of the restored Empire there is a fatalistic predilection for resurrecting its great dates, affirming successes and disavowing misfortunes, in a second and improved edition. This glorious resurrection of Napoleonic dates, successful so far with respect to blows against the Republic, is failing with respect to blows against the enemy abroad. And the Empire without the victories of the Empire reminds one of the adaptation of Shakespeare's Hamlet which not only lacks the melancholy of the Prince of Denmark but also the Prince himself.b Paris had arranged for a great feat of arms in the Crimea on December 2, 1854.c It came to grief thanks to a surplus of rain and a shortage of ammunition. On June 18, 1855 an improved version of the battle, with a different result, was to be performed at Sevastopol. Instead, the Franco-English army suffered its first serious defeat.

London is in sombre mood; the stocks have fallen, and in one day Palmerston has forfeited what it took him months of the most

[^1]: Pélissier.— Ed. An allusion to the English saying: "It's Hamlet without the Prince." — Ed. The third anniversary of the Bonapartist coup in France.— Ed.





**[p. 298]**

We prepared our readers sufficiently for the fact that Pélissier's stubborn persistence in attacking the southern flank heralded disaster for the allied armies. Immediately he assumed command we drew attention to the mitigating circumstance that lack of transport would place great obstacles in his way when it came to operations in the open field/ Both points have now been confirmed by the English press. For instance, today's Morning Herald says:

The ingenious negligence with which, from the outset of the war, the Cabinet administered the resources at its disposal has

[^1]: "The army cannot take the field—as, according to all rules of strategy, it ought to do, beat the relieving army at Simpheropol []• That it cannot do because the 'Government grave-diggers', Neglect and Delay, have been at their murderous work again, and of 20,000 baggage cattle, which we ought to have, we have not above 4,000 or 5,000; and this while disease is once more becoming rampant in a camp which contains every possible incitement to fever, cholera, and plague. This incapacity of moving them, the same as it was at Varna and in the Valley of Death, is the cause why, day after day, our generals are compelled to waste the lives of our soldiers in desperate attacks upon almost impregnable earthworks, while the noble army that should take the field is lying on the Chernaya, without cavalry or means of transport." g

[^2]: The Globe and Traveller. Marx refers to the issue of June 21, 1855.— Ed. Palmerston made that statement on Friday, June 22. The Times, No. 22088, June 23, 1855.—Ed. c The Leader, No. 274, June 23, 1855.— Ed. Marx uses the English word.— Ed. Marx uses the English words "this is too bad, Sir!" — Ed. This refers to the German version of the article "Sevastopol" (see this volume, pp. 260-66) and to other articles in the Neue Oder-Zeitung.—Ed.

[^3]: g The Morning Herald, No. 22465, June 23, 1855.— Ed.





**[p. 299]**

ruined the army? Overwork. And what is the reason of this overwork? Lack of numbers. But this lack of numbers, as the financial report shows, was the result of a Cabinet intrigue. And Prince Albert complains that the Queenb has no troops at her disposal! And that the Cabinet's hands are tied! The Layard debate revealed that the self-same Cabinet, whilst complaining about lack of transport, sent troopships to Portsmouth via Newcastle-upon-Tyne to collect coal, or from the Clyde to Liverpool and from Deptford to Woolwich to be inspected by the Surveyor.c

The misfortunes of June 18 have made immediate reinforcements necessary. Accordingly orders were issued yesterday for immediate embarkation: the 15th Infantry Regiment, which has recently returned from Ceylon; the King's 51st Light Infantry Regiment, the 80th and 94th Infantry Regiments, all the India detachments from the various depot companies, and 1,200 men of the cavalry are to leave immediately for the theatre of war. Orders have been telegraphed to Marseilles for special steamships to be sent from there to the Governors of Malta and Gibraltar and to the Lord High Commissioner0 of the Ionian Islands with the task of transporting all the men who are fit for service not only from the garrisons but also from the reserve of the Household Brigade and all the reserve battalions that can be spared before the arrival of the relieving regiments and militia. Sailing at once are: the 13th Light Infantry Regiment of Gibraltar, the 31st Infantry Regiment from the Ionian Islands, the 48th from Corfu, the 54th from Gibraltar, the 66th from Gibraltar, and the 92 nd Scottish Highland Regiment from Gibraltar. British forces in the Crimea will thus be increased by more than 13,000 men. To this must be added four field batteries, a troop of mounted artillery and reinforcements for the siege train, all of which are ready and are

[^1]: a "State of the Army before Sebastopol", The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: Victoria. For an account of Prince Albert's speech see this volume, pp. 273-76.— Ed.

[^3]: Marx uses the English term.— Ed.





**[p. 300]**

Yesterday in the Commons Roebuck gave notice that on July 3 (Tuesday week) he would table the following motion:

Roebuck's motion therefore deliberately includes: Palmerston, Russell, Clarendon, Granville and Lansdowne, at one and the same time members of the present Cabinet and the previous one. The small, venomous, Thersites-like but crafty barrister, the perfect master of parliamentary tactics, saw himself forced into tabling this motion, as his constituents at Sheffield threatened to subject him to a vote of no confidence at a public meeting, because he had denounced Palmerston on Tuesday and expressed his confidence in the same Palmerston on Thursday. Prince Albert's unfortunate interference in matters between the Cabinet

[^1]: "That this House, deeply lamenting the sufferings of our army during the winter campaign in the Crimea, and coinciding with the resolution of their committee that the conduct of the Administration was the first and chief cause of these misfortunes, hereby visits with its severe reprehension every member of the Cabinet whose counsels led to such disastrous results."

[^2]: a Ch. Montesquieu, L'Esprit des Lois, V, XIII.— Ed. b The Times, No. 22088, June 23, 1855.— Ed.





**[p. 301]**

We shall report on the latest activities and fortunes of the Administrative Reformers, and the machinations of the clerics next time.

Written on June 23, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 291, June 26, 1855 Published in English for the first time Marked with the sign X

