---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "74. K. Marx. Anti- Church Movement.- Demonstration in Hyde Park "
Page_Range: "333-339"
---

# 74. K. Marx. Anti- Church Movement.- Demonstration in Hyde Park 



**[p. 302]**

Karl Marx

ANTI-CHURCH MOVEMENT.f—DEMONSTRATION IN HYDE PARK]221

London, June 25. It is an old and historically established maxim that obsolete social forces which are still nominally in possession of all the attributes of power and continue to vegetate long after the basis of their existence has rotted away, because the heirs are quarrelling among themselves over the inheritance even before the obituary notice has been printed and the testament read, such forces, when they face their final death struggle, will once more muster all their strength, pass from the defensive to the offensive, become defiant instead of evasive and seek to draw extreme conclusions from premises which have not only been put in question but already found wanting. This is the case today with the English oligarchy and the Church, its twin sister. Countless attempts at reorganisation have been made within the Established Church, both the High and the Low Church, attempts to come to an understanding with the Dissenters222 and thus to set up a compact force to oppose the impious mass of the nation. There has been a rapid succession of religious coercive measures. The pious Earl of Shaftesbury, formerly known as Lord Ashley, mournfully announced in the House of Lords that in England alone five million had become wholly alienated not only from the Church but from Christianity.3 "Compelle intrare",h is the reply of the Established Church. It leaves it to Lord Ashley and similar dissenting, sectarian and overwrought pietists to pull the chestnuts out of the fire for it.

[^1]: Shaftesbury's speech on June 12, 1855. The Times, No. 22079, June 13, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: "Compel them to come in, that my house may be filled" (Luke, 14 : 23).— Ed.





**[p. 303]**

This alliance between a dissipated, degenerating and pleasure- seeking aristocracy and the Church, an alliance based on squalid profiteering on the part of beer magnates and monopolistic wholesalers, occasioned yesterday a mass demonstration in Hyde Park, the like of which London has not seen since the death of George IV, "the first gentleman of Europe". We saw it from beginning to end and do not think it is an exaggeration to say that the English Revolution began in Hyde Park yesterday. The latest news from the Crimea acted as an effective ferment upon this "unparliamentary", "extraparliamentary", and "anti-parliamentary" demonstration.

[^1]: a Marx uses the English terms "Beer Bill" and, below, "Sunday Trading Bill".— Ed.



"the aristocracy was largely refraining from employing its servants and horses on Sundays".

The following wall poster, issued by the Chartists, which could be seen throughout London at the end of last week announced in huge letters:

"New Sunday Bill prohibiting newspapers, shaving, smoking, eating and drinking and all kinds of recreation and nourishment, both corporal and spiritual, which the poor people still enjoy at the present time. An open-air meeting of artisans, workers and 'the lower orders' generally of the capital will take place in Hyde Park on Sunday afternoon to see how religiously the aristocracy is observing the Sabbath and how anxious it is not to employ its servants and horses on that day, as Lord Robert Grosvenor said in his speech. The meeting is called for three o'clock on the right bank of the Serpentine (a small river in Hyde Park) on the side towards Kensington Gardens. Come and bring your wives and children in order that they may profit by the example their 'betters' set them!"

It should be borne in mind, of course, that what Longchampsh

means to the Parisians, the riding track along the Serpentine in Hyde Park means to the English haute voléec—the place where in the afternoon, particularly on Sunday, they parade their magnifi- cent carriages and their finery and exercise their horses, followed by swarms of lackeys. It will be realised from the above poster that the struggle against clericalism assumes the same character as every serious struggle in England—that of a class struggle waged by the poor against the rich, the people against the aristocracy, the "lower orders" against their "betters".

Approximately 50,000 people had gathered at the place announced on the immense lawn on the right bank of the Serpentine in Hyde Park at about 3 o'clock. Gradually the assembled multitude swelled to a total of at least 200,000 due to additions from the other bank. One could see that small groups of people were made to move from one spot to another. The police, who were present in force, were obviously endeavouring to deprive the organisers of the meeting of what Archimedes had asked for to move the earth, namely, one firm spot to stand upon. Finally a fairly large crowd made a firm stand and Bligh the Chartist constituted himself chairman on a small eminence in the midst of the throng. No sooner had he begun his harangue than

[^1]: From Grosvenor's speech in the House of Commons on June 13, 1855. The Times, No. 22080, Tune 14, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: b

[^3]: A hippodrome on the outskirts of Paris.— Ed. The upper crust.— Ed.





**[p. 305]**

"Her Majesty's police declare that Hyde Park is private property of the Crown and that Her Majesty a is unwilling to let her land be used by the people for their meetings. So let's move to Oxford Market."

With the ironical cry: "God save the Queen!"b the throng broke up to walk to Oxford Market. But meanwhile Finlen, a member of the Chartist Executive,224 rushed to a tree some distance away followed by a crowd who in a twinkle formed so close and compact a circle around him that the police abandoned their attempt to get at him.

"Six days a week," he said, "we are treated like slaves and now Parliament wants to rob us of the bit of freedom we still have on the seventh. These oligarchs and cap- italists allied with sanctimonious parsons wish to do penance by mortifying us instead of themselves for the unconscionable murder in the Crimea of the sons of the people."

We left this group to approach another where a speaker stretched out on the ground addressed his audience from this horizontal position. Suddenly, shouts could be heard on all sides: "Let's go to the Row, to the carriages!" The heaping of insults upon riders and occupants of carriages had already begun. The constables, who constantly received reinforcements from the city, drove the promenading pedestrians off the road. They thus helped to form a thick throng of people on either side of Rotten-Row, from Apsley House along the Serpentine as far as Kensington Gardens—a distance of more than a quarter of an hour walk. The spectators consisted of about two-thirds workers and one-third members of the middle class, all with women and children. The involuntary actors comprising elegant ladies and gentlemen, "commoners and lords", in their high coaches-and- four with liveried lackeys in front and behind, joined by a few elderly gentlemen on horseback slightly under the weather from the effects of wine—were not showing off this time but were made to run the gauntlet. A babel of jeering, taunting, discordant ejaculations, in which no language is as rich as English, enveloped

[^1]: Victoria.— Ed.

[^2]: Marx uses the English words.— Ed.





**[p. 306]**



[^1]: "Where are gone the geese? Ask the police! " e

[^2]: a Marx uses the English words "Go to church!" followed by a German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^3]: Marx uses the English words "prayer book" and "Give it to read to your horses!" followed by a German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^4]: Cf. Goethe, Faust, Der Tragödie erster Teil. Hexenküche.— Ed.

[^5]: Marx gives these and the following exclamations in English and translates them in brackets.— Ed.

[^6]: Marx quotes in English and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 307]**

"Reorganisation of Chartism!

"A big public meeting will take place next Tuesday, June 26th, in the Literary and Scientific Institute in Friar Street, Doctors' Commons, to elect delegates to a conference for the reorganisation of Chartism in the capital. Admission free."

Most of the London papers carry today only a brief account of the events in Hyde Park. No leading articles have appeared as yet, except in Lord Palmerston's Morning Post. It writes that

At the same time, however, it declares that the "fanatical" Lord Grosvenor is solely "responsible" for this mischief, and that he has provoked the "just indignation of the people"! As though Parliament had not passed Lord Grosvenor's Bill in three readings! Or perhaps he too brought his influence to bear "by physical force on the free action of the Legislature"?

[^1]: "a scene in the highest degree disgraceful and dangerous was enacted yesterday in Hyde Park", an "outrage on law and decency. [] It was distinctly illegal to interfere, by physical force, with the free action of the Legislature [].We must have no repetition of violence on Sunday next, as has been threatened".*

[^2]: Written on June 25, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung,

[^3]: No. 295, June 28, 1855

[^4]: Marked with the sign x

[^5]: a Marx uses the English words followed by a German translation in parenthesis.— Ed.

[^6]: b The Morning Post, No. 25422, June 25, 1855.— Ed.



