---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "75. K. Marx. Miscellaneous Reports "
Page_Range: "339-344"
---

# 75. K. Marx. Miscellaneous Reports 



**[p. 308]**

Karl Marx

MISCELLANEOUS REPORTS

London, June 26. During yesterday's sitting in the Commons3

Mr. Otway rose and asked whether Lord Palmerston

"intended to take any measures to induce Lord Grosvenor to withdraw the Sunday Trading Bill." (General cheering. )

Lord Palmerston replied:

As one can see the mass demonstration in Hyde Park has intimidated the Commons. They are dropping the Bill and make bonne mine à mauvais jeu.c The Times describes the scene on Sunday in Hyde Park as a "great act of retributive justice", and calls the Bill a product of "class legislation", "a measure of organised hypocrisy" and pokes fun at this display of "parliamen- tary theology ".d

On the question of the Hangö massacre225 the First Lord of the Admiralty, Sir Charles Wood, announces that today he has received dispatches from Admiral Dundas. According to them five seamen and the Finnish captain had been killed by the fire of the Russians, four seamen and two Finns had been wounded and

[^1]: "If my noble friend" (Grosvenor) "hears that cheer I think he will be disposed to attend to it." (Cheers.)

[^2]: The speeches by, Otway, Palmerston, Wood, Duncombe and Malins were published in The Times, No. 22090, June 26, 1855.— Ed.

[^3]: Marx uses the English terms "Sunday Trading Bill" and "cheers".— Ed. Make the best of a bad job.— Ed. d The Times, No. 22090, June 26, 1855.— Ed.



taken prisoner, and three officers, four seamen and two Finns had been taken prisoner without being wounded. Admiral Dundas had written a letter to the Governor of Helsingfors3 stating what had happened and remonstrating most strongly against the atrocious act of firing on a boat under a flag of truce. He had received an answer in which the Governor excused and to a certain extent justified the act. He declared that the officers and soldiers said they had not seen the flag of truce. They had been irritated because on some other occasions vessels had hoisted the Russian flag and it had been reported in the newspapers that English vessels had elsewhere hoisted the flag of truce to take soundings. The whole justification can be reduced to the short-sightedness of the Russian soldiers and officers. At any rate it is a sign of civilisation that Russian soldiers should read newspapers and be "irritated" by newspaper reports.

The Administrative Reformers™ have announced another meet- ing for tomorrow in the Drury Lane [Theatre]. As before: a meeting with tickets of admission and speakers by previous arrangement. Pontius Pilate asked: What is truth? Palmerston asked: What is worthiness} The Administrative Reformers have replied: worthiness is equivalent to a man's annual earnings.15

Accordingly those reformers have undertaken a change in their internal organisation. Previously the members of the general committee—in reality electing themselves—had to go through the motions of an election in the form of a general vote taken within the association. Now anyone who pays £50 and above in annual subscriptions becomes a member of the general committee as a matter of course. Previously the ten-guinea and the one-guinea rule were considered sufficient for protecting the "movement" from plebeian importunity. Now the ten-guinea gentlemen are no longer considered sufficiently "respectable" and the one-guinea people are actually regarded as the mob. The posters advertising the meeting say literally:

The rights of members within the association are therefore calculated according to a sliding scale of guineas. The naked,

[^1]: "Admission only by ticket, which can be obtained by members. Anyone subscribing £50 and above is a member of the general committee, anyone subscribing ten guineas or one guinea is a member of the association."

[^2]: J. M. Nordenstam.— Ed.

[^3]: In the original a pun on the word "Verdienst" which can mean either 'merit", "deserts", "worthiness" or "earnings", "income".— Ed.





**[p. 310]**



[^1]: "There are symptoms at this moment among ourselves," ruefully exclaims The Daily News, the organ par excellence of the City reformers, "which indicate that no time is to be lost in averting a dangerous lapse from a high and severe tone of morality among our industrial classes."

[^2]: The crisis of Messrs Strahan and Co. has of course given rise to a run c by the public on the counters of the City's private banks,

[^3]: Marx refers to Drummond's speech in the House of Commons on June 18, 1855. The Times, No. 22084, June 19, 1855.—Ed. Marx uses the English words "dock warrants".— Ed. Marx uses the English word.— Ed.





**[p. 311]**

Thus the nation is reminded, at the most inopportune time, that the City, which is rebelling against the oligarchy, was the forcing

[^1]: "it must sacrifice money and blood in order to preserve the blessed comforts of our holy religion from the desecrating French, and to preserve itself from the mournful desperation of atheism".





**[p. 312]**

Written on June 26, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 297, June 29, 1855 Published in English for the first time Marked with the sign x

