---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "85. K. Marx. Russell's Dismissal "
Page_Range: "383-386"
---

# 85. K. Marx. Russell's Dismissal 



**[p. 352]**

Karl Marx

RUSSELL'S DISMISSAL

London, July 17. Whether voluntary or under duress, Russell's dismissal has served to parry Bulwer's motion3 just as Bulwer parried Roebuck's motion. This view, which we expressed in our report of July ll, a was confirmed beyond any shadow of doubt by yesterday's sitting in the Commons.b It is an old Whig axiom that "parties are like snails—the tails move the heads". The present Whig Cabinet, however, seems to be polypoid; it appears to thrive on amputation. It survives the loss of its limbs, its head, anything except its tail. Although Russell was not the head of the Cabinet, he was the brains of the party which forms the Cabinet and which is represented by it. Bouverie, the Vice-President of the Board of Trade,c represents the tail of the Whig polyp. He discovered that the Whig body would have to be decapitated to keep the Whig rump alive, and he made this discovery known to Palmerston in the name of and on behalf of the Whig tail. Russell yesterday assured that tail of his "contempt". Disraeli tormented Bouverie with a "physiology of friendship" and a biological description of the various types in which the species being known as "friend" is distinguishable. Finally, Bouverie's attempt to justify the action by saying that he and the tail had discarded Russell in order to save him, completes the genre picture of this party of office- hunters.

The natural head of the Whig party being amputated in this way, its usurped head, Lord Palmerston, has become all the more

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 337-39.— Ed.

[^2]: A report of the House of Commons debate of July 16, 1855 was published in The Times, No. 22108, July 17, 1855.—Ed. Marx uses the English term.—Ed.





**[p. 353]**

He linked Bulwer's motion so closely to Russell that it fell through of its own accord as soon as the corpus delicti, Russell, vanished from the Cabinet. Bulwer was therefore obliged to declare that he was withdrawing his motion. However, he could not resist the temptation of actually delivering the speech which was to have supported his motion. He forgot that the motion on which his speech was based no longer existed. Palmerston exploited this unfortunate situation. He immediately assumed the pose of a gladiator after the battle had been called off. He was rude, blustering and boastful, but in this way he incurred chastisement at the hands .of Disraeli, which, as the expression on his face revealed, caused even this accomplished play-actor to lose his usual cynical composure. However, the most important part of Disraeli's reply was the following statement:

The "circumstances" to which Disraeli refers were, as he explains in the course of his speech, "the difficulties presented by the French". Disraeli indicates that Clarendon's correspondence, which was intended for use in Parliament, contradicts the secret instructions issued by the Ministry. He concluded his speech with the following words:

[^1]: "I have reason to believe that the views which Lord Russell brought from Vienna were favourably received, not merely by a majority, but by the whole of his colleagues, and that nothing but circumstances which they did not anticipate [] prevented the plan of the noble Lord being cordially and unanimously accepted. I do not make that statement without due authority. I make it with the same conviction that I spoke six weeks ago of the ambiguous language and uncertain conduct of the Government, the truth of which subsequent events have already justified. I make it with the conviction that, even before this Session of Parliament terminates, evidence confirming that statement will be in the possession of the House."

[^2]: 13—3754





**[p. 354]**

Roebuck surpassed Disraeli in the intensity of his language. " I want to know who are the traitors who are now in the Cabinet?" First Aberdeen and Newcastle, Then Graham and Gladstone and Herbert. Then Russell. Who is next?

In the meantime the position of the man who secretly ruled over the coalition, as he now officially rules the Ministry, is quite secure. If another vote of no-confidence were to take place before the end of the session, which is not likely, he will dissolve Parliament. At all events he has six months before him in which to conduct Britain's foreign policy without restriction, not even disturbed by the noise and mock battles of the Commons.

Written on July 17, 1855

Printed according to the news- paper

[^1]: First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 333, July 20, 1855

[^2]: Marked with the sign x

[^3]: Published in English for the first time



