---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "89. K. Marx. Palmerston.- The Physiology of the Ruling Class of Great Britain "
Page_Range: "398-402"
---

# 89. K. Marx. Palmerston.- The Physiology of the Ruling Class of Great Britain 



**[p. 367]**

Karl Marx

PALMERSTON.—THE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE RULING CLASS OF GREAT BRITAIN

London, July 23. If the guarantee of the Turkish loan259 should run into the same opposition this evening as it did last Friday, then Palmerston will immediately dissolve the House of Commons. To the adroit all circumstances are favourable. Dissolving the Commons as a result of Bulwer's motion, or dissolving it on account of Roebuck's motion3—both methods are equally risky. The diplomatic activity at the Vienna conferences,260 the administration organising the winter campaign—neither position is suitable for appealing to the electorate from Parliament. But the "guarantee of the Turkish loan"\ Scenery, situation and motive are transformed as if by a stroke of magic. It is no longer Parliament that condemns the Cabinet on the grounds of treachery or incompetence. It is the Cabinet which accuses Parliament of hindering the conduct of the war, of jeopardising the French alliance and of abandoning Turkey. The Cabinet no longer appeals to the country to absolve it from Parliament's condemnation. It appeals to the country to condemn Parliament. In fact the loan is so formulated that Turkey receives no money directly, but, under the most humiliating conditions for a nation, she is put under guardianship and has to allow the sum allegedly loaned to her to be administered and dispensed by English commissioners. The English administration has stood the test so brilliantly during the Eastern war that it must indeed be tempted to extend its blessings to foreign realms. The Western Powers have taken possession of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Constan- tinople, and not just the Ministry of Foreign Affairs but the Ministry

[^1]: For a description of the Bulwer-Lytton and Roebuck motions and their discussion in the House of Commons see this volume, pp. 337-43, 353-57.— Ed.





**[p. 368]**

Palmerston has promoted Sir W[illiam] Molesworth to Colonial Secretary, and Sir B[enjamin] Hall to Commissioner of Forests and Land Revenues'5 in place of Molesworth. Molesworth belongs to Wakefield's school of colonisation.261 Its principle is to make land in the colonies artificially dear and labour artificially cheap in order to engender the "necessary combination of productive forces". The experimental use of this theory in Canada drove immigrants away from that country to the United States and Australia.

In London there are three committees of inquiry in session at the moment, one appointed by the Cabinet, the other two by

[^1]: From Layard's speech in the House of Commons on June 15, 1855. The Times, No. 22082, June 16, 1855.—Ed.

[^2]: Marx calls it Minister der Waldungen und Domänen. The actual title was up to 1857 Commissioner of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues and in that year was changed to Commissioner of Works and Public Buildings.—Ed.





**[p. 369]**

finds itself flooded daily with evidence not only that the constables used unprecedented brutality, but also that this brutality was intentional and used on orders. If it were uncompromising the inquiry would have to begin with Sir George Grey and the Cabinet as the principal offenders. The second committee, under Berkeley's chairmanship, dealing with the effects of the Act on the "sale of spirits on Sundays", shows the sanctimonious superficiality of Sabbatarian experiments for the improvement of society. Instead of decreasing, the number of excesses from drunkenness has increased. The only difference is their partial displacement from Sundays to Mondays. The third committee, chaired by Scholefield, is concerned with the adulteration of food and drink and of all commodities contributing to the maintenance of life.262 Adultera- tion seems to be the rule, purity the exception. For the most part the substances added to impart colour, odour and taste to worthless materials are poisonous, and all of them are detrimental to health. Trade appears here as a vast laboratory of fraud, the list of commodities as a diabolical catalogue of phantoms, free competition as the freedom to poison and be poisoned.

The Report of the Inspectors of Factories for the half-year ending April 30c has been laid before both Houses of Parliament—an invaluable contribution to the characterisation of the Manchester men of peace and the class disputing the aristocracy's monopoly of government. In the report the "accidents arising from machinery" are classified under the headings:

We read of a young woman "who lost her right hand", of a child who "had the nasal bones crushed in and the sight of both eyes destroyed by this machine", of a man whose "left leg was cut off, [] right arm broken in three or four places", whose head

[^1]: 1. "Causing death", 2. "Loss of right hand or arm. Loss of part of right hand. Loss of left hand or arm. Loss of part of left hand. [] Fracture of hand or foot. Injuries to head and face" and 3. "Lacerations, contusions and other injuries not enumerated above."

[^2]: a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 323-27.— Ed. c Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, for the Half Year Ending 30th April 1855.—Ed. Here and in the rest of this passage the Report has "Amputation of" where Marx writes "Loss of".— Ed.

[^3]: Marx paraphrased the extract.— Ed.



The Roebuck committee and the British oligarchy! Scholefield's committee and the British commercial class! The report of the Factory Inspectors and the British factory owners—these three headings provide a graphic idea of the physiology of the classes now ruling in Great Britain.

[^1]: Written on July 23, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 343, July 26, 1855 Published in English for the first time Marked with the sign X



