---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "93. K. Marx. General Simpson's Resignation.- From Parliament "
Page_Range: "501-503"
---

# 93. K. Marx. General Simpson's Resignation.- From Parliament 



**[p. 470]**

Karl Marx

GENERAL SIMPSON'S RESIGNATION.

— FROM PARLIAMENT

London, August 3. The day before yesterday The Morning Post, in obviously embarrassed phraseology, informed the British public that General Simpson will soon resign his command under the pretext of weakened health and will have no successor.3 In other words: the English army is to be placed under French general command. In this way the Government would shift the responsibility for the conduct of the war from itself onto "our great and glorious ally". Parliament forfeits the last semblance of control. At the same time an infallible means for transforming the alliance between England and France into the most acrimonious dissension between the two nations has been discovered. We see the same master hand at work in whose all too robust grasp the Entente Cordiale331 broke into pieces in 1839.

Parliament concludes its present session in a fitting manner— with scandals.b First scandal: the withdrawal of the Bill for limited liability in private (not joint-stock) commercial companies at the bidding of the big capitalists before whose frowns even the Olympian Palmerston trembles. Second scandal: the adjournment in infinitum of the Bills regulating lease-hold tenure in Ireland, which have been moving to and fro in both Houses of Parliament for 4 years—a cowardly compromise in which the House of Commons has consented to take back its own work, the Cabinet to break its word and the Irish Brigade332 to hold the question open

[^1]: "The Command of the Army in the East", The Morning Post, No. 25455, August 2, 1855.— Ed.

[^2]: The reference is to the sittings of the House of Commons of July 24, July 30 and August 2. The Times, No. 22115, July 25; No. 22120, July 31 and No. 22123, August 3, 1855.—Ed.





**[p. 471]**

Written on August 3, 1855 Printed according to the news- paper First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 361, August 6, 1855 Published in English for the first time Marked with the sign x

[^1]: Marx uses the English word.— Ed.



