---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "95. K. Marx. The Military Forces against Russia "
Page_Range: "507-508"
---

# 95. K. Marx. The Military Forces against Russia 



**[p. 476]**

Karl Marx

THE MILITARY FORCES AGAINST RUSSIA

London, August 11. At the moment the armies mustered by the allies against Russia are limited, apart from their own troops, to:

1. a small Piedmontese auxiliary corps of 15,000 men—a corps extorted from Piedmont by the concerted threats of England, France and Austria. This bloodletting of Piedmont was one of the conditions Austria made for selling its adhesion to the "Treaty of 2 December"33,1;

2. the Foreign Legion, amounting to a few thousand troops—an olla podrida3 of occidental mercenaries enticed bit by bit surrepti- tiously and illegally away from their respective countries;

3. an Italian Legion of 4,000 to 5,000 men, still in the process of formation;

4. a Polish Legion, existing in the form of a project; 5. finally, in the distant future, a Spanish auxiliary corps, to represent "dire financial necessity".

This motley sample card of volunteer corps and diminutive armies provides a map of the Europe England and France have in their retinue at this moment. Can one conceive of a more consummate caricature of the army of nations which the first Napoleon rolled into motion against Russia?

[^1]: Written on August 11, 1855

[^2]: First published in the Neue Oder-Zeitung, No. 375, August 14, 1855

[^3]: Marked with the sign x

[^4]: Printed according to .the news- paper

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: Hotchpotch (literally: rotten stew).— Ed.



