---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "128. K. Marx. Speech at the Anniversary of The People's Paper. Delivered in London, April 14, 1856 "
Page_Range: "686-688"
---

# 128. K. Marx. Speech at the Anniversary of The People's Paper. Delivered in London, April 14, 1856 



**[p. 655]**

Karl Marx

SPEECH AT THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE PEOPLE'S PAPER

435 DELIVERED IN LONDON, APRIL 14, 1856

The so-called revolutions of 1848 were but poor incidents— small fractures and fissures in the dry crust of European society. However, they denounced the abyss. Beneath the apparently solid surface, they betrayed oceans of liquid matter, only needing expansion to rend into fragments continents of hard rock. Noisily And confusedlv they proclaimed the emancipation of the Pro- letarian s i.e. the secret of the 19th century, and of the revolution of that century. That social revolution, it is true, was no novelty invented in 1848. Steam, electricity, and the self-acting mule were revolutionists of a rather more dangerous character than even citizens Barbes, Raspail and Blanqui. But, although the atmo- sphere in which we live, weighs upon every one with a 20,000 lb. force, do you feel it? No more than European society before 1848 feit the revolutionary atmosphere enveloping and pressing it from all sides. There is one great fact, characteristic of this our 19th century, a fact which no party dares deny. On the one hand, there have started into life industrial and scientific forces, which no epoch of the former human history had ever suspected. On the other hand, there exist symptoms of decay, far surpassing the horrors recorded of the latter times of the Roman Empire. In our days, everything seems pregnant with its contrary. Machinery, gifted with the wonderful power of shortening and fructifying human labour, we behold starving and overworking it. The new-fangled sources of wealth, by some strange weird spell, are turned into sources of want. The victories of art seem bought by the loss of character. At the same pace that mankind masters nature, man seems to become enslaved to other men or to his own infamy. Even the pure light of science seems unable to



**[p. 656]**



[^1]: First published in The People's Paper, Reproduced from the newspaper No. 207, April 19, 1856

[^2]: A character in Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream.—Ed. The Vehmgericht, derived from Vehme (judgment, punishment) and Gericht (court), was a secret tribunal which exercised great power in Westphalia from the end of the twelfth to the middle of the sixteenth century.— Ed.



