---
Volume: 14
Document_Title: "130. K. Marx. The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument "
Page_Range: "693-703"
---

# 130. K. Marx. The House of Lords and the Duke of York's Monument 



**[p. 662]**

Karl Marx

THE HOUSE OF LORDS AND THE DUKE

OF YORK'S MONUMENT439

At the very time that Lord John Russell

"The minimus of hind'ring knot-grass made,"

amused the House of Commons with one of his dwarfish ~ o< k-schemes for the education of that giant called the people, his u-'lows in the House of Lords were exhibiting a practical specimen me education enjoyed by the heaven-born rulers of Great Zwv An. The subject of their debates was a report of the C'><nmittee of the House of Commons, recommending for local : >.n poses; the removal of the Duke of York's monument from V* a'.erloo Place.b On that occasion the Marquis of Clanricarde said,

According to the Marquis of Lansdowne

Aberdeen, the travelled Thane, called the monument "in a certain manner sanctified." The Earl of Malmesbury

[^1]: "The Di,:ke of York was not only eminent from his illustrious birth, but he had performed great professional services to the Crown and the country The regret for his death was not confined merely to the circle of his friends^ but was universally teit. All parties concurred in bearing testimony to the zeal which he had displayed in the discharge of the duties committed to him."c

[^2]: "a memorial erected some years ago to the memory of an illustrious individual whom they ail respected, should not be lightly disposed of or set away."

[^3]: "concurred entirely in what had fallen from the noble earl with respect to what might be called the sentimental view of the case."

[^4]: Shakespeare, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Act III, Scene 2.— Ed. A road was to be built across St. James's Park.— Ed. The speeches of Clanricarde, Lansdowne, Aberdeen and Malmesbury in the House of Lords on April 10, 1856 were reported in The Times, No. 22339, April 11, 1856.— Ed.



The most memorable event in the Duke of York's lifetime—his birth — happened to occur in 1763. Twenty-six years later he contrived to draw the attention of the world to his person by renouncing the state of single blessedness, and getting a married man. The Anti-Jacobin war afforded the royal prince an opportunity of becoming a royal captain. If, during his ever-famed campaign of Flanders, and his no less famed campaign of the Heldei, the English army was regularly beaten, it had the constant satisfaction of beholding its royal commander returning to his home again in a whole skin. It is known how cleverly he ran away before Houchard at Hondscho, and how his siege of Dunkirk in some sort outjested the siege of Troy.440 Such was the distin- guished celebrity he won in his Flanders campaigning that Pitt, growing jealous of his renown, caused the war-minister Dundas, to send despatches to his Royal Highness with the urgent intimation to come home, to reserve the display of his personal bravery to times of greater hazard, and to remember the old Fabian maxim: jamae ctiam jactura facienda est pro patriae An officer of the name of Cochrane Johnstone, to whom by and by we shall return, was the person selected to be the bearer of these despatches and—says an author of those bygone times—

Greater still than the Duke's military exploits during this same campaign, turned out his financial ones, a convenient fire at every depot, settling for ever the accounts of all his commissaries, contractors, and in-supers. These successes notwithstanding, we find his Royal Highness again in 1799 at the head of the Helder expedition which, in the British papers under Pitt's avowed patronage, was represented as a mere holiday march, it being thought a rather preposterous idea that an army of 45,000 men, with the squadron commanding the Zuyder Zee at its back, with an offspring of the royal house of Brunswick at its head, was not by its mere appearance to scatter to the winds a rabble of about 20,000 Frenchmen,

[^1]: "Johnstone performed this service with a degree of celerity and resolution that entitled him to the admiration of the army."

[^2]: "commanded by a printer's boy of Limousin, one Brune, who had received his military and political education in the Tennis Courts of the French Revolution."

[^3]: Even glory should be sacrificed for the Fatherland.— Ed. h [W. Cobbett.] "Mr. Cochrane Johnstone" [I], Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. X, No. 1, July 5, 1806.— Ed.





**[p. 664]**

Helder, Brune was so discourteous as not to let him before he had signed the famous capitulation of Alkmaar,441 stipulating the surrender of eight thousand French and Dutch seamen then prisoners of war in England.

The Duke of York had now had enough in the shape of campaigns, and wisely condescended for a while to shroud his name in the obscurity naturally enveloping the commander-in- chief at the Horse-Guards.3 Yet in that position he found himself placed over a department costing the nation £23,000,000 a year, and entrusting to him, under the King's sole control, the absolute power of promoting or cashiering any number of about 12,000 commissioned and staff officers.

His Royal Highness did not fail to engross a very large portion of public gratitude by his enlightened general orders regarding the cashiering the queues of all the privates and non-commissioned officers; the addition of a sponge to their appointments, for the purpose of keeping their heads clean, the dressing right and left, the quick and slow step; the locking up and the opening of ranks, the wheeling and facing, the tossing of the firelock, the hair-cutting and the black-legging, and the polishing of arms and accoutrements; the screwing up of John Bull's broad chest in tight jerkins, and the crowning his blockhead with an Austrian cap, and the covering his large back with a faceless coat—and all that sort of important affairs, making up the drill-serjeant's science. At the same time he exhibited the higher qualities of a strategist and a tactician in his domestic campaign against Colonel Cochrane Johnstone, the officer who had been commissioned by Pitt to cut short his victorious campaigns in Flanders. Johnstone, in the year 1801, Colonel of the 8th West India regiment (blacks) and Governor of the island of Dominica, was called home in consequence of a mutiny that had broken out in the regiment. He preferred charges against John Gordon, the major of his regiment, who was in immediate command of it at the time of the mutiny. This Major Gordon, as well as a Colonel Gordon, the Duke's secretary, belonged to that distinguished family that has stocked the world with great men—such as Gordon, the Ad-

[^1]: le., the headquarters of the British army.— Ed.



"there existed charges against him, the merit of which had not been decided.""1

He failed to obtain any further satisfaction until 28th of May, 1804, when he became informed that Major Gordon was his accuser. His trial was put off from one term to the other; the court-martial which was to try him being ordered now to Canterbury, now to Chelsea, and it only took place in March 1805. Johnstone being fully and honourably acquitted by the court, applied for restoration to his rank, but met with a refusal from his Royal Highness on May 16, 1805. On June 28th General Fitzpatrick, one of the Fox coterie,443 announced in Parliament that in the interest of Johnstone, the injuries inflicted upon whom "had spread the greatest alarm throughout the whole army," he should propose a specific proceeding at the commencement of the next session of parliament.b The next session came, but having in the meantime been transformed into a war-minister, Fitzpatrick stated from the Treasury-bench that he should not bring forward the threatened motion. Some time afterwards this Secretary of war—a carpet-knight who had never seen an enemy, who had sold his company in the guards twenty years before, and never served a single day since—had a regiment given to him by the Duke of York; Fitzpatrick, the war-minister, having thus to audit the account of Fitzpatrick the Colonel. By dint of such stratagems

[^1]: [W. Cobbett,] "Mr. Cochrane Johnstone" [I], Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. X, No. 1, Tulv 5. 1806.— Ed.

[^2]: b

[^3]: Fitzpatrick's speech in the House of Commons, June 28, 1805. Hansard's Parliamentary Debates [First Series), Vol. V, London, 1812.— Ed.





**[p. 666]**

That notwithstanding a certain dullness, hereditary in the illustrious house of Brunswick, the Duke was a sharp fellow in his own way, is sufficiently shown by the fact that he figured as the chief of George Ill's "domestic cabinet," the closet and family- council, and as the head of the court-party, called the King's friends.444 It is not less shown by the fact that, with an annual income of £61,000 he contrived to squeeze £54,000 as a loan out of the ministry, and in spite of this public credit not to pay his private debts. To perform such feats, a man must needs be of nimble spirits. As it is generally known how "upon place and greatness many eyes are stuck,"a it will be easily understood that the Grenville Administration was not ashamed to propose to his Royal Highness to relieve him from some subordinate duties of his office—which relief, as is complained in a pamphlet paid by the duke,b would have reduced the commander-in-chief to a mere cipher. Lansdowne, be it remarked, served in the same cabinet, under the name of Lord Henry Petty. That same administration threatened to clog the illustrious warrior with a military council, falsely pretending that "the nation" would be lost, unless the inexperience of the commander-in-chief was assisted by a body of officers. Thus far was the duke pressed by this unworthy cabal as to demand an inquiry into his conduct at the Horse Guards. Happily this intrigue of the Grenville party was defeated by the immediate interposition, or rather command, of George III who, although a notorious idiot, had wit enough to understand the genius of his son.

In the year 1808 the brave and patriotic sentiments of the royal captain induced him to solicit the command of the British armies in Spain and Portugal, but then the general dread of the masses to behold England bereft of such a home-commander, at so critical a moment, burst out in most noisy, indiscreet, and almost indecent demonstrations. He was warned to remember his former ill- fortune abroad, to keep him in reserve for the enemy at home, and to beware of public execration. Nothing daunted, the magnanimous duke had a pamphlet published, to prove his hereditary claim to be beaten in Portugal and Spain, as he had

[^1]: Shakespeare, Measure for Measure, Act IV, Scene 2 (paraphrased).— Ed. This refers to the anonymous pamphlet, A Plain Statement of the Conduct of the Ministry and the Opposition, towards His Royal Highness the Duke of York, London, 1808.—Erf.





**[p. 667]**

"in the present instance it is notorious that ministers and people, ins and outs, are fully agreed in opinion."

Yea, the talked-of appointment of the duke seemed to threaten England with a regular row. Thus, one may read in a London weekly paper of that time: —

"Not to the inns, the coffee-houses, the marts, the malls, and the settled gossiping-shops, has the conversation upon the subject been confined. It has entered into all private circles; it has been a standing dish at the dinner and tea-table; men stop each other to talk about the Duke of York's going to Spain; the eager Londoner stops even on his way to Change, to ask whether it be really true that the Duke of York is going to Spain; nay, in the very church porches of the country, among the smock-frocked politicians, whose conversation as to the public matters seldom went beyond the assessed taxes, you see half a score faces thrust almost to the point of contact, in order to know for 'zarten if the Duke of York be a goocn to be zent to Spain.'"

If is evident, then, in spite of the numerous efforts of his envious deprecators, that it was impossible to keep the past deeds of the Duke hidden from the world. What a satisfaction for one single man, this unanimous anxiety of a whole people to keep him at heme. The Duke, of course, could not. but give his gailant mind the extreme pain of chilling his martial ardour, and quietly staying at the Horse Guards.

Before passing to the brightest period of this monumental life, we must stop a moment and show that as early as 1806, the Duke was fully and publicly appraised by his fathers loyal subjects. In his Political Register of that year, Cobbett savs:

[^1]: "He rendered himself famous for nothing but running away, and bringing irsfamy upon the arms of England []; [] at once half an idiot, and yet master of the utmost degree of low cunning; [] equally conspicuous for feminine weakness and fiendlike cruelty, for pride and for abjection, for prodigality and rapacious- ness. ,] While he had the command of the soldiers, h'e made a vile job of his trust, and, through the means thereof, shamefully robbed the people whom he was amply paid to defend. [] Having previously bribed or intimidated every one, from whom he might apprehend exposure, he gave way to his numerous and conflicting vices, and rendered himself the object of universal, though whispering, execra- tion."1'

[^2]: a [W. Cobbett,] "Duke of York", Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. XIV, No. 8, August 20, 1808.— Ed.

[^3]: [W. Cobbety"Mr. Cochrane Johnstone" [II], Cobbett's Weekly Political Register, Vol. X, No. 8, August 23, 1806.— Ed.





**[p. 668]**



[^1]: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates [First Series], Vol. XII, London, 1812. This volume also contains material of the House of Commons inquiry proposed by Wardle and held in February 1809. Excerpts from it are quoted below in this article.— Ed.

[^2]: b On January 31, 1809.— Ed.

[^3]: The seat of a number of government offices in London, including the army headquarters, the Admiralty and various ministries.— Ed.



The Duke.— I am continually worried by Mr. French about this levy. He is always wanting something more to be done in his favour. [] How does he behave to you darling?

There were also produced some love letters of the illustrious duke mixed up with mercantile-military transactions. One of them dated Aug. 4, 1803 commences thus.

After this sample of the Duke's style it is not to be wondered at that the learned gentlemen of St. John's College, Oxford, presen- ted his Royal Highness with the diploma of an L.L.D. Not content with military commission, the lovers also hit upon trafficking in bishoprics and deaneries.

Other points turned up not less honourable to the illustrious scion of the House of Brunswick; for instance that an officer, named Dowler, had for years been Mrs. Clarke's paramour, and that in his company she sought for a compensation for the grudgery, the disgust, and loathing experienced in the duke's society.

[^1]: Mrs. Clarke.— Middling, not very well. The Duke.— Master French must mind what he is about, else I will soon cut up him and his levy too.

[^2]: "How can I sufficiently express to my sweetest, my darling love, the delight which her dear, her pretty letter gave me, or how much I feel all the kind things she says to me in it; millions and millions of thanks for it my angel."





**[p. 670]**

It would be tedious to wade through the whole proceedings of the Commons, with all its sordid incidents, or to expostulate on the gallant duke's begging letter dated 23rd February (1809) in which he solemnly declared, to the House of Commons "on the honour of a prince," that he knew of nothing, even of what was proved by letters in his own handwriting. It may suffice to say that General Ferguson declared in the House "that it was not for the honour of the army that the duke should remain in command;" that the Chancellor of Exchequer, Mr. Perceval, announced on March 20th, the Duke's resignation of his office, and that upon this announcement the House accepted Lord Althorp's motion that "his Royal Highness the Duke of York, having resigned the command of the army, the House did not now think it necessary to proceed any further," etc. Lord Althorp grounded his motion on his wish

As a tribute for his bold proceedings against the duke, Colonel Wardle was deluged with thanks—addresses transmitted from every county, city, town and borough of Great Britain.

One of the first acts of the Regency of the Prince of Wales—afterwards George the Fourth—in 1811, was York's restoration to his position as commander-in-chief—an initiatory step quite in keeping with the whole reign of that royal Caliban b

who, because the last of mankind, was called the first gentleman of Europe.

[^1]: "to place the duke's resignation on the journal of the House, in order to record that the Duke had forfeited the confidence of the country for ever, and in consequence he must abandon all hopes of ever returning again to that situation."

[^2]: From Beresford's speech in the House of Commons on February 3, 1809. Excerpts from it and also from the speeches of Ferguson on March 17, 1809 and Perceval and Althorp on March 20, 1809 are quoted according to Hansard's Parliamentary Debates [First Series], Vols. XII and XIII, London, 1812.— Ed.

[^3]: A character in Shakespeare's The Tempest.—Ed.





**[p. 671]**

Written about April 25, 1856 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in The People's Paper, No. 208, April 26, 1856

