---
Volume: 27
Document_Title: "II "
Page_Range: "130-133"
---

# II 



**[p. 103]**

"Indeed," th e righteousl y indignan t Anonymou s finall y exclaims , "t o describ e these practice s w e kno w onl y on e word , a wor d wit h whic h Mar x i s ver y familia r (see Capital, p . 257 a): the y ar e simpl y 'nefarious'. "

Whose practices , Mr. Luj o Brentano ?

II

Marx's repl y (Der Volksstaat, August 7 , 1872 , Documents, No . 6 b) is good-nature d enoug h t o dea l wit h al l th e sti r create d b y Mr. Brentan o about Professo r Beesly , The Theory of the Exchanges, etc.; w e leav e thi s asid e a s bein g o f secondar y importance . I n conclusion, however , it produce s anothe r tw o fact s whic h ar e absolutely decisiv e fo r th e mai n issue . Th e "lyingl y added " passage i s t o b e found , beside s i n th e Times report , i n th e report s of tw o othe r Londo n mornin g paper s o f Apri l 17 , 1863 . According t o The Morning Star, Gladston e stated :

"This augmentation"—whic h ha d jus t bee n describe d a s a n intoxicatin g augmentation o f wealt h an d power—"i s a n augmentatio n entirel y confine d t o th e classes possesse d o f property. "

According t o The Morning Advertiser:

For an y othe r opponent , thes e proof s woul d b e "absolutel y devastating". Not , however , fo r th e anonymou s Brentano. His reply (Concordia, Augus t 22 , 1872 , Documents , No . Ie), whic h betrays undiminishe d impudence , wa s neve r see n b y Marx , sinc e numbers o f Concordia late r tha n tha t date d Jul y 1 1 wer e no t sen t to him . I mysel f firs t rea d thi s repl y i n Brentano' s reprin t (Meine Polemik, etc., 1890 d), an d mus t therefor e tak e not e o f it here , fo r better o r fo r worse .

The quotatio n remain s "forged" , an d th e Times repor t "show s the exac t opposite , sinc e The Times an d Hansar d full y coincide" . The confidenc e o f thi s declaratio n is , however , simpl y child' s pla y

[^1]: "The augmentatio n stated"—a n intoxicatin g augmentatio n o f wealt h an d power—"is a n augmentatio n entirel y confine d t o th e classe s possesse d o f property."

[^2]: "The dogged mendacity wit h whic h he " (Marx ) "cling s t o th e distorte d quotatio n i s astonishin g eve n fo r someon e fo r who m n o mean s ar e to o bas e fo r hi s subversive plans. "

[^3]: a K . Marx , Capital, Vol . I , Boo k I , Par t III , Chapte r X , Sectio n 6 (se e presen t edition, Vol . 35). — Ed.

[^4]: b Se e thi s volume , pp . 144-51. — Ed. c Ibid. , pp. 152-54. — Ed. d L . Brentano, Meine Polemik mit Karl Marx, Berlin , 1890, pp . 21-23. — Ed.

[^5]: 9*





**[p. 104]**

compared t o th e "impudence " wit h whic h Mr. Brentan o suddenly gives u s th e followin g information :

"Marx's secon d metho d o f obscurin g th e Times repor t wa s simpl y t o suppress , in hi s Germa n translation , th e relativ e claus e whic h showe d tha t Gladston e ha d only sai d tha t th e augmentatio n o f wealth , whic h wa s show n b y th e incom e ta x returns, was confined to the classes of property, sinc e th e workin g classe s wer e no t subject t o incom e tax , an d tha t thu s nothin g abou t th e increas e i n th e prosperit y o f the workin g classe s coul d b e learne d fro m th e incom e ta x returns ; not , however , that th e workin g classe s i n realit y ha d bee n exclude d fro m th e extraordinar y augmentation o f nationa l wealth. "

Thus whe n The Times say s that th e oft-mentione d augmentatio n is confine d t o th e classe s o f property , the n it say s th e opposit e o f the "lyingl y added " sentence , whic h say s th e same . A s regards th e "simply suppresse d relativ e clause" , w e shal l no t allo w Mr . Brentano to ge t awa y wit h that , i f h e wil l bea r wit h u s fo r a moment. An d no w h e ha s happil y survive d th e firs t grea t leap , it is easie r fo r hi m t o asser t tha t blac k i s white, an d whit e black. No w that h e ha s manage d t o dea l wit h The Times, The Morning Star and The Morning Advertiser wil l giv e hi m littl e trouble .

"For thes e papers , eve n a s he " (Marx ) "quote s them , spea k fo r us . Afte r Gladstone ha s said , accordin g t o bot h papers , tha t h e doe s not believe " (which , a s we know , Mr. Brentan o claims) "this intoxicatin g augmentatio n o f wealt h an d power i s confined t o th e classe s which fin d themselve s i n pleasan t circumstances , h e continued: 'This grea t increas e o f wealt h takes no cognizance at all o f th e conditio n of th e labourin g population . The augmentation which I have described is an augmentation entirely confined to the classes possessed of property.' The contex t an d th e use o f th e expressio n 'tak e cognizance ' sho w clearl y tha t thi s increas e an d th e augmentation o f th e increas e cited , an d th e citing, " (sic\) "ar e intende d t o indicat e those discernibl e i n th e incom e ta x returns. "

The Jesui t wh o originate d th e sayin g Si duo faciunt idem, non est idem wa s a bungle r compare d t o th e anonymou s Brentano. When The Times, The Morning Star an d The Morning Advertiser declar e unanimously tha t th e sentenc e whic h Brentano claims Mar x ha d "lyingly added " wa s actuall y uttere d b y Gladstone , the n thes e papers spea k unanimousl y "for " Mr. Brentano . And whe n Mar x quotes thi s sentenc e verbatim , thi s i s a "lyin g quotation" , "impudent mendacity" , "complet e forgery" , " a lie" , etc . An d if Mar x canno t appreciat e this , tha t passe s th e understandin g o f our Anonymous , alia s Luj o Brentano, and h e find s i t "simpl y nefarious".

But le t u s dea l wit h th e allege d "lyin g addition " onc e an d fo r al l by quotin g th e report s o n ou r passag e i n al l Londo n mornin g papers o n Apri l 17 , 1863 .

We hav e alread y ha d The Times, The Morning Star an d The Morning Advertiser.



**[p. 105]**

"I ma y say for one, that I shoul d loo k almos t wit h apprehensio n an d alarm o n this intoxicating augmentation of wealth and power i f i t wer e m y belie f tha t i t was confined t o the masses who are in easy circumstances . Thi s questio n t o wealth take s no cognizanc e a t all of the condition o f the labouring population . The augmentation stated is an augmentation entirely confined to the classes possessed of property."

Morning Herald:

"I ma y sa y tha t I fo r on e woul d loo k wit h fea r an d apprehensio n a t this intoxicating increase of wealth i f I wer e o f opinio n tha t i t is confined t o the classes in easy circumstances . This great increase of wealth which I have described , an d which is founded o n accurat e return s is confined entirely to the augmentation of capital, and takes n o accoun t o f th e poore r classes. "

Morning Post:

"I ma y say, I for one, would loo k wit h fea r an d apprehension whe n I conside r this grea t increas e o f wealt h i f I believe d tha t it s benefit s wer e confine d t o the classes i n eas y circumstances . This augmentation of wealth whic h I hav e described , and whic h i s founde d o n accurat e return s is confined entirely to the augmentation of capital, and takes n o account o f the augmentation o f wealth o f the poorer classes. "

Daily News:

"I ma y sa y tha t I fo r on e woul d loo k wit h fea r an d apprehensio n whe n I consider this great increase of wealth i f I believe d tha t it s benefits wer e confine d t o the classe s i n eas y circumstances . This augmentation of wealth whic h I hav e described, an d whic h i s founde d upo n accurat e returns , is confined entirely to the augmentation of capital, an d take s n o accoun t o f the augmentation o f wealth o f the poorer classes. "

[^1]: Standard:

[^2]: "I ma y sa y tha t I fo r on e woul d loo k wit h fea r an d apprehensio n a t this intoxicating increase of wealth i f I wer e o f th e opinio n tha t i t was confined t o the classes i n eas y circumstances . This great increase of wealth whic h I hav e described , and whic h i s founded o n the accurate return s is confined entirely to the augmentation of capital, an d take s n o accoun t o f th e poore r classes. "

[^3]: T h e eigh t newspaper s cite d her e were , a s fa r a s I know , th e onl y morning paper s publishe d i n Londo n a t tha t time . Thei r testimony i s "convincing" . Fou r o f t h e m — T h e Times, The Morning Star, The Morning Advertiser, Daily Telegraph—give th e sentenc e i n exactly th e for m whic h Mar x ha d "lyingl y added" . T h e augmenta - tion describe d earlie r a s a n intoxicatin g augmentatio n o f wealt h and powe r "is entirely confined to classes of property". T h e fou r others — Morning Herald, Morning Post, Daily News an d Standard— give i t i n a n "onl y formall y mor e contracted " version , b y whic h i t is furthe r reinforced ; thi s augmentatio n "is confined entirely to the augmentation of capital". T h e eigh t newspaper s cite d al l hav e thei r separat e complet e staff o f parliamentar y reporters . The y ar e thu s th e sam e n u m b e r



