---
Volume: 27
Document_Title: "79. To the Executive of the Social- Democratic Party of Hungary on the Third Party Congress "
Page_Range: "470-472"
---

# 79. To the Executive of the Social- Democratic Party of Hungary on the Third Party Congress 

5«<tat.©rga» N k inig<ttfä«Mf<fi«n foiiatbtmo&tattfätn Tgattti.

[TO TH E EXECUTIVE OF TH E SOCIAL-DEMOCRATI C PARTY OF HUNGAR Y

ON TH E THIR D PART Y CONGRESS] 409

London, Ma y 15 , 189 4

Dear Comrades ,

Your kin d invitatio n t o your Part y Congres s reache d m e on th e 8. inst . Unfortunatel y a passin g indispositio n prevente d m e fro m replying immediately , an d thu s toda y I ca n onl y expres s m y thanks retrospectively, and wish the greatest success in your work.

I to o hav e followe d wit h utmos t interes t th e recen t develop - ments i n Hungary. 3 I n Hungary , a s elsewhere , capita l i s increas- ingly takin g ove r th e whol e o f nationa l production . No t satisfie d with creatin g a new industrial sector , i t subjugates agricultur e too, transforms it s traditional methods , destroys the individual peasant , divides th e rura l populatio n int o larg e estat e owners 0 an d capitalist faiseursc on th e on e han d an d a hos t o f propertyles s proletarians o n th e other . Th e headwa y thi s revolutio n o f capita l has alread y mad e i n Hungar y w e sa w recentl y i n Hod - mezovâsârhely.410 Bu t we shal l hav e t o endur e thi s capitalis t revolution. I t bring s with i t unspeakable miser y fo r th e great mass of th e people , bu t i t alone als o creates th e condition s which mak e

[^1]: a Crosse d ou t in the manuscript i s the following paragraph : "The y sho w the irresistible powe r wit h whic h capita l everywher e set s itsel f u p as owner o f nationa l production, an d this no t only i n the field o f industry bu t also i n agriculture, and this i s by far the most importan t secto r fo r the east o f Europe.". — Ed.

[^2]: b Th e manuscript has : " a few large estat e owners". — Ed. •" Middlemen.— Ed.





**[p. 444]**

With sincer e greetings ,

F. Engels

First publishe d i n th e Arbeiterpresse, Printed accordin g t o th e Arbeiter- No. 20 , Ma y 18 , 189 4 and , i n Hun - presse, checked wit h th e roug h garian, i n Népszava, No. 20 , Ma y 18 , 189 4 manuscrip t

Published i n Englis h fo r th e firs t time

