---
Volume: 27
Document_Title: "5. Record of Frederick Engels' Speech at a Meeting to Commemorate the Paris Commune "
Page_Range: "568-569"
---

# 5. Record of Frederick Engels' Speech at a Meeting to Commemorate the Paris Commune 



**[p. d]**

[RECORD OF FREDERICK ENGELS ' SPEEC H

AT A MEETIN G TO COMMEMORAT E

THE PARI S COMMUNE ]

The speec h of Mr. Engel s (Dr. Marx' s righ t hand ) a t th e meeting h e attende d wa s ver y good .

He referre d t o th e histor y o f th e pas t twenty-tw o year s an d said : At th e beginnin g o f tha t time , th e onl y tw o Englishme n con - nected wit h th e International—Lucraf t an d Odger—lef t i t becaus e of it s endorsin g th e polic y o f th e Communards , an d becaus e Socialism wa s then looke d upon as an abomination. I n the autumn o f 1871, a conferenc e wa s held , an d th e proposa l o f a political party , distinct and separate from al l other political parties, was first brough t forward. Th e nex t yea r a t the Hague , th e English delegate s took th e side of th e Anarchists i n deprecating parliamentary action. 475 At that time, political effort o n th e part of the working classes was unknown. Now, th e positio n ha s completel y changed . Th e formatio n o f th e new Trade Union s in 188 8 wa s the mos t important event that ha d ever happened i n working class history, and had led to the formatio n for th e firs t tim e o f a n Independen t Labou r Party, 477 whic h wa s bound t o absor b al l othe r parties . H e though t thi s showe d tha t the lesson s o f th e Pari s Commun e ha d no t bee n los t no r for - gotten."

Amongst th e othe r speaker s a t thi s gatherin g wer e Mrs . Eleano r Marx Avelin g (Dr . Marx' s daughter) , Mr . F . Lessne r (on e o f th e founders o f th e International) , Mr . Edwar d Bernstei n an Mr. J . Connell . Ma y th e memor y o f th e Pari s Commun e neve r die!

[^1]: First publishe d i n The Labour Elector, Reproduce d fro m th e newspape r No. 12 , Marc h 25 , 189 3



