---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Letter to the Editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung "
Page_Range: "28-29"
---

# K. Marx. Letter to the Editor of the Allgemeine Zeitung 



**[p. 3]**

Karl Marx

[LETTER TO THE EDITOR OF THE ALLGEMEINE ZEITUNG]1

October 19, 1859, 9 Graf ton Terrace,

Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, London3

Sir,

As long as I had a hand in the German press I attacked the Allgemeine Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung attacked me. However, this does not of course prevent me from assisting the Allgemeine Zeitung, as far as it lies in my power, in a case in which it has in my view fulfilled the primary duty of the press: that of the denunciation of humbug.b The enclosed document would be a legal document here in London.0 I do not know whether it is the same in Augsburg. I have procured the said document because Blind refused to stand by the statement which he had made to me and others, which I passed on to Liebknecht, and which allowed the latter no doubts about the denunciation contained in the anonymous pamphlet.d

Yours very sincerely,

Dr. K. Marxe

Published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, Printed according to the news- No. 300, October 27, 1859 paper

Published in English for the first time

a The Allgemeine Zeitung of October 27, 1859, in which this letter was published, gives the address inaccurately: "I. Grafton Terrace, Quai, Haydpark, Haverstock Hill, London." In the issue of November 21, which carried Marx's "Declaration" (see this volume, pp. 8-9), the address is given correctly.— Ed.

b Marx uses the English word.— Ed. c This refers to the statement by the compositor Vögele to the effect that the pamphlet Zur Warnung was written in Blind's hand (see this volume, pp. 123-25.).—Ed.

d See this volume, pp. 122-24.— Ed. e "Editor of the former Rheinische Zeitung" (footnote added by the editors of the Allgemeiîie Zeitung).— Ed.

