---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Statement to the Editors of Die Reform, the Volks- Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung "
Page_Range: "29-33"
---

# K. Marx. Statement to the Editors of Die Reform, the Volks- Zeitung and the Allgemeine Zeitung 



**[p. 4]**

Karl Marx

[STATEMENT T O THE EDITORS OF DIE REFORM, THE VOLKS-ZEITUNG AND THE ALLGEMEINE ZEITUNG]2

London, November 7, 1859

I see from a copy of Der Freischütz, No. 132, which a friend has sent me from Hamburg, that Eduard Meyen has felt obliged to place his unequivocally decisive weight into the scales of the Vogt affair.3 The horse-power, or should I say, the donkey-powerb of his logic is concentrated in the great thesis: that because he was a friend of Blind, and because Blind failed to send him a copy of the anonymous pamphlet, the original document I had sent to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung must of necessity be a falsehood. In his sly litde way he takes good care, of course, not to say this direcdy; he says it indirectly.

Incidentally, I wish that Herr Eduard Meyen would provide evidence to prove that my time is valueless enough to be squandered in attacks on the German vulgar democrats.

At the end of 1850 I broke off all relations with the German emigration in London, which really did collapse once I had pulled from under it die one thing that had held it together: its antagonism towards me. The process of dissolution was hastened, above all, by the industry of such agents as Meyen who, for example, publicly agitated against the Ruge faction on behalf of the Kinkel faction. In the nine years that have meanwhile elapsed, I have been a constant contributor to the New-York Tribune, a paper witih 200,000 subscribers and hence a reading public roughly approximate to that of Der Freischütz. Have I ever even so much as mentioned the name of a single one of the German

a This refers to the item marked **, "Der Process Carl Vogt's gegen die Augsburger Allg. Ztg.", Der Freischütz, No. 132, November 3, 1859.— Ed.

[^1]: b Marx uses the English expressions "horse-power" and "donkey-power".— Ed-





**[p. 5]**

vulgar democrats, or spent even so much as a single word on any of the despicable attacks that these men of honour have heaped upon my head in the German and especially the German- American press over the past five years?

During this time I did indeed attack, although I did not slander, "great democrats" of the sort that were dutifully admired by Herr Eduard Meyen. Such as the great democrat Lord Palmerston.3 My offence was all the more unforgivable because my "slanders" were reprinted not merely by English papers of the most diverse political tendencies—from the Chartist People's Paper to The Free Press of Mr. Urquhart—out also as a pamphlet at least 15,000 copies of which were produced in London, Sheffield and Glasgow without any prompting by me. During that same period, moreover, I denounced the great democrat Louis Bonaparte, first in a work in German (Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte)^ which was confiscated at all the German frontiers, but which circulated in considerable numbers in the United States and which appeared in extract in die then London organ of Chartism.3 I have continued this "slander" of the "great democrat" Bonaparte in die Tribune to this day in die form of analyses of his financial system, his diplomacy, his warfare and his idées napoléoniennes.4

Louis Bonaparte has sent die New-York Times a public statement in gratitude0 for its opposition to these "slanders". Seven years ago I even denounced the "great democrat" Stieber in the Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial,d which was pulped at the frontier of Baden and Switzerland. Herr Meyen will surely give me credit for that. Such slander is democratic nowadays since it takes place "with die permission of die high audiorities". But my frequent errors in timing are revealed not only by die organ of Herr Eduard Meyen, but also by diat of Herr Joseph Dumont in Cologne.*" When in 1848 and 1849 I took die liberty of coming out for the cause of the Hungarian, Italian and Polish nationalities in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, who raged and foamed at die mouth more than die organ of Herr Joseph Dumont in Cologne? But at that time, of course, no Louis Napoleon Bonaparte had given his "liberal" blessing to the cause of these nationalities. That the

a The reference is to Marx's pamphlet Lord Palmerston (see present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed.

b The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see present edition, Vol. 11).— Ed. c Instead of Dankschreiben (message of gratitude) Die Reform has Denkschreiben (memorandum), presumably a misprint.— Ed.

d See present edition, Vol. 11.— Ed. *' Kölnische Zeitung.— Ed.



**[p. 6]**

former editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung have remained true to their opinions is known even to the erstwhile Herr Joseph Dumont, now Giuseppe Delmonte, from Frederick Engels' pam- phlet Po and Rhine? which appeared at the start of the war. But as for Eduard Meyen's democracy "in its narrower sense", I have ignored it for nine years and have only on two occasions, quite recently, broken my silence. The first time was to attack Kossuth and the second was in criticism of Herr Gottfried Kinkel. I did in fact make a number of marginal comments of a purely grammati- cal nature on Kinkel's aesthetic effusions in the Hermann, and I published them in Das Volk. This was the only thing which I did write for Das Volk, apart from an article on the Peace of Villafranca under the title "Quid pro quo".b But in the eyes of Eduard Meyen, a "good democrat" is doubtless just as justified in violating the "despotic" rules of syntax as in deserting from the republican camp to that ot the royalists.0

I now find myself at the end of this epistle in the opposite difficulty to Hegel's at the beginning of his Logic? He wanted to advance from Being to Nothing, whereas I wish to move from Nothing to Being, namely from Eduard Meyen to a real case, the case of Vogt. To make it brief I ask Karl Blind the following questions:

1. Did Blind impart to me information about Vogt on May 9 on the platform of the Urquhart meeting, information whose substance tallies precisely with that contained in the pamphlet Zur Warnung?

2. Did Blind publish an anonymous article in the London Free Press of May 27, bearing the title "The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary",6 an article which, apart from the omission of the name of Vogt, repeats the substance of the pamphlet Zur Warnung?

3. Did Blind cause the above-mentioned pamphlet to be printed at his expense in London in the print-shop of Herr F. Hollinger, Litchfield Street, Soho?f

a See present edition, Vol. 16.— Ed. b The reference is to Marx's articles "Kossuth and Louis Napoleon", "Gatherings from the Press" and "Quid pro quo" (see present edition. Vol. 16).— Ed.

c An allusion to Gottfried Kinkel's speech before the court martial in Rastatt on August 4, 1849.— Ed.

d G. W. F. Hegel, Die Wissenschaft der Logik, Band I, Abteilung 2, Berlin, 1833.— Ed.

[^1]: e See this volume, pp. 122-23.— Ed. f See this volume, pp. 116, 122, 123-24.— Ed.





**[p. 7]**

Karl Marx

Published in the supplement to Die Re- Printed according to the news- form, No. 139, November 19, 1859 paper

Published in English for the first time

3 This phrase is in English in the original.— Ed. b In partibus infidelium—literally: in parts inhabited by infidels. The words are added to the title of Roman Catholic bishops holding purely nominal dioceses in non-Christian countries. Here the expression means "only in word".— Ed.

