---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette "
Page_Range: "35-37"
---

# K. Marx. Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette 



**[p. 10]**

Karl Marx

PROSECUTION OF THE AUGSBURG GAZETTE6

TO THE EDITOR OF THE FREE PRESS

9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

H aver stock Hill, London, 4th February, 1860

Sir,

You will remember that The Free Press of May 27th, 1859, published an article headed: "The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary. " In that article Mr. Vogt, of Geneva, although not named, was pointed at, in a manner intelligible to the German refugees, as a Bonapartist agent, who, on the outset of the Italian war, had offered "large bribes" to Liberals in Germany, and German Democrats in London. The writer gave vent to his intense delight at the indignant repulse those attempts at bribery had met with. Mr. Charles Blind I assert to be the author of that notice. You can correct me if I am in error. Some time later, there circulated in London an anonymous German pamphlet, entitled

Zur Warnung (a warning), which, in point of fact, may be considered a reproduction of the article of The Free Press, only that it gave fuller details and Vogt's name. Having been reprinted in a German London paper, entitled Das Volk* (The People); thence the anonymous pamphlet found its way to the columns of the

Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitungb (The Augsburg Gazette), which, consequently, was sued by Mr. Vogt for libel. Meanwhile I had obtained from Mr. Vögele, a compositor then employed by Mr. Hollinger, the publisher of Das Volk, a written declarationc to the effect, that the pamphlet was printed in Hollinger's office, and drawn up by Mr. Charles Blind. This declaration, as I told you at the time, was sent over to the Augsburg Gazette. The Augsburg

* Das Volk, No. 7, June 18, 1859.— Ed. b "K. Vogt und die deutsche Emigration in London", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 173 (supplement), June 22, 1859.— Ed.

[^1]: c See this volume, pp. 3, 123-25.— Ed.





**[p. 11]**

Now, before taking any further step, I want to show up the fellows who evidently have played into the hands of Vogt. I, therefore, publicly declare that the statement of Blind, Wiehe and Hollinger, according to which the anonymous pamphlet was not printed in Hollinger's office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, is a deliberate lie. First, Mr. Vögele, one of the compositors, formerly employed by Hollinger, will declare upon oath that the said pamphlet was printed in Hollinger's office, was written in the hand-writing of Mr. Blind, and partly composed by Hollinger himself. Secondly, it can be judicially proved that the pamphlet and the article in Das Volk, have been taken off the same types. Thirdly, it will be shown that Wiehe was not employed by Hollinger for eleven consecutive months, and, especially, was not employed by him at the time of the pamphlet's publication. Lastly, witnesses may be summoned in whose presence Wiehe himself confessed having been persuaded by Hollinger to sign the wilfully false declaration in the Augsburg Gazette. Consequently, I again declare the above said Charles Blind to be a deliberate liar.

If I am wrong, he may easily confound me by appealing to an English Court of Law.

Karl Marx

Published as a pamphlet on February 4, Reproduced from the pamphlet 1860

a This refers to Karl Blind's declaration dated "London, November 3" in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 313, November 9, 1859.— Ed.

b ibid. See also this volume, p. 126.— Ed. c See this volume, pp. 8-9.— Ed. d The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 345, December 11, 1859.— Ed. e Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess—Ed.

