---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. To the Editors of the Volks- Zeitung. Declaration "
Page_Range: "37-39"
---

# K. Marx. To the Editors of the Volks- Zeitung. Declaration 



**[p. 12]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITORS OF THE VOLKS-ZEITUNG

DECLARATION 7

I hereby make it known that I have taken steps preparatory to instituting legal proceedings for libel against the Berlin National- Zeitung in connection with the leading articles in Nos. 37 and 4 1 a

regarding Vogt's pamphlet Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung. I reserve the right to answer Vogt in writing at a later date since this requires putting a number of questions to people not at present in Europe.

For the moment then I shall say only this:

1. To judge by the anthology in the National-Zeitung—strangely the book itself has up to now been unobtainable in London either from booksellers or the acquaintances to whom Herr Vogt had earlier sent his so-called Studien" — Vogt's concoction is merely the elaboration of a sketch that he published nine months ago in his private Moniteur, the Biel Handels-Courier.0 At the time I had his lampoon published in London without comment. Such a simple procedure was sufficient here, where the situations and per- sonalities are well known, to provide a judgment on the Herr Professor.

2. The pretext which led Herr Vogt to launch his campaign against me, like the pretext for the Italian campaign, was an "idea". I was alleged to be the author of the anonymous pamphlet Zur Warnung. From the enclosed circular0 in English, which I have had published here, you will see that I have taken steps to compel

a "Karl Vogt und die Allgemeine Zeitung" and "Wie man radikale Flugblätter macht", National-Zeitung, Nos. 37 and 41, January 22 and 25, 1860.— Ed.

b Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, Genf und Bern, 1859.— Ed. c An allusion to Vogt's article "Zur Warnung" in the Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150 (special supplement), June 2, 1859.— Ed.

d See this volume, pp. 10-11.— Ed.



**[p. 13]**

Herr Blind and consorts either to concede the falseness of that pretext by their silence, or to be convicted of it by an English court.

February 6, 1860 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, H aver stock Hill, London

Karl Marx

Published in the Volks-Zeitung, No. 35, February 10, 1860; in the supplement to the Kölnische Zeitung, No. 41, February

10, 1860; in Die Reform, No. 18, February 11, 1860; in the supplement to the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 48, February 17, 1860 (with alterations)3 and in other German papers

Printed according to the Volks- Zeitung checked with the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

a The manuscript of this declaration in the Allgemeine Zeitung written in Jenny Marx's hand and a covering note in Marx's handwriting have been preserved.— Ed.

