---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "II. The Bristlers "
Page_Range: "63-73"
---

# II. The Bristlers 



**[p. 38]**

II

T H E BRISTLERS

"But, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine; it is all filled up with guts and midriff."

(Shakespeare)a

"Bristlers" or "Brimstone Gang" is what it says in the original Biel gospel ("Magnum Opus", Documents, p. 31). "Brimstone Gang" or else "Bristlers" is what we find in the "Magnum Opus" (p. 136).b

According to both versions the "Brimstone Gang" and the "Bristlers" are one and the same gang. The "Brimstone Gang" was, as we have seen, dead and buried by the middle of 1850. Therefore the "Bristlers" too? Our "well-rounded character" is the civilising agent attached to the December Gang, and civilisa- tion, according to Fourier, is distinguished from barbarism by the fact that in it lies simple are replaced by lies composite.0

Our "composite" Imperial Falstaff informs us ("Magnum Opus", p. 198) that a certain Abt is the "lowest of the low". What admirable self-effacement: Vogt puts himself in the positive, but his Abt in the superlative, appointing him, as it were, his Field Marshal Ney. When Vogt's original gospel appeared in the Biel Commis voyageur,d I requested the editors of Das Volk*1 to reprint the original rigmarole without further comment. Despite this they followed the reprint with this note:

"The above rigmarole stems from the pen of a dissolute creature called Abt, who, eight years ago in Geneva, was unanimously found guilty of a variety of

a Henry IV, Part I, Act III, Scene 3. Marx quotes in English.— Ed. b Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 31, 136.— Ed. c Charles Fourier, Théorie de l'unité universelle. Oeuvres complètes, Vol. 2, Paris, 1843, pp. 78-79, and Vol. 5, Paris, 1841, pp. 213-14.—Ed.

d Marx means Karl Vogt's article "Zur Warnung" in the Schweizer Handels- Courier, No. 150 (special supplement), June 2, 1859 (see this volume, p. 29).— Ed.



**[p. 39]**

The editors of Das Volk took Abt for the author of Vogt's original rigmarole; they forgot that Switzerland had two Rich- monds in the field,38 a Vogt, as well as an Abt.

In the spring of 1851, then, the "lowest of the low" invented the "Bristlers", whom Vogt pilfered from his Field Marshal in the autumn of 1859. The sweet habit of plagiarism acquired in making books on natural history instinctively clings to him in those dealing with his police activities. For a time the President of the Workers' Association in Geneva had been a brushmaker [Bürsten- macher] called Sauernheimer. Abt bisected Sauernheimer's profes- sion and name, took the beginning of the former and the end of the latter and from the two halves thus obtained he ingeniously formed the whole: "Bürstenheimer" [Bristier]. This title he originally bestowed on Sauernheimer, as well as on his closest friends: Kamm from Bonn, a brushmaker by trade, and also Ranickel, a bookbinder's apprentice from Bingen. He appointed Sauern- heimer general and Ranickel adjutant of the Bristlers, while Kamm became a Bristler sans phrase. Later, when two refugees belonging to the Workers' Association in Geneva, Imandt (who is at present professor at the college in Dundee) and Schily (a lawyer, formerly of Trier, now in Paris), brought about Abt's expulsion at the hands of a court of honour of the Association, Abt published an abusive pamphlet39 in which he elevated the whole Workers' Association in Geneva to the rank of "Bristlers". It is clear, then, that there were Bristlers in general and Bristlers in particular. "Bristlers" in general included the Genevan Wrorkers' Association, the same association which Vogt tricked into giving him a testimonium paupertatis which was published in the Allgemeine Zeitung3 at a time when he had been driven into a corner, the same association on which he fawned during the celebrations in memory of Schiller and Robert Blum (1859). "Bristlers" in particular were, as I have mentioned, Sauernheimer, who is totally unknown to me and who has never been to London; Kamm who, having been turned out of Geneva, went to the United States via London, where he looked up Kinkel and not me; and finally Ranickel, or the Ranickel,' who remained as the adjutant of the

a This refers to the declaration of the German Workers' Educational Association in West Switzerland printed in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 235, August 23, 1859.— Ed.

'• The name suggests Ran unkei — ranunculus and also, by metathesis, Karnickel = (1) rabbit and (2) a fool or Simple Simon. Marx puns below on Ran-Igel = hedgehog.— Ed.

[^1]: 3-130.-.





**[p. 40]**

The adjutant of the Bristlers became the adjutant of General Vogt, who has only failed to achieve military renown because Plon-Plon thought the Neapolitan captain Ulloa (another general by courtesyc) bad enough for the task his ''corps de touristes"

had to perform in the Italian campaign, and so held his Parolles in reserve for the great adventure with "the lost drum" that will unfold on the Rhine.41 In 1859 Vogt promoted his Ranickel from the proletariat to the middle classes, obtained a business for him

(objets d'art, bookbinding and stationery) and in addition procured for him the custom of the Geneva Government. The adjutant of the Bristlers now became Vogt's "maid of all work"/1 his Cicisbeo, intimate friend, Leporello, confidant, correspondent, gossip-bearer and scandal-monger, but above all, after the Fall of our Fat Jack,e

he acted as his spy and as recruiting officer for Bonaparte among the workers. A Swiss paper recently reported the discovery of a third species of hedgehog, viz., the Ran or Rhine hedgehog [Ran- oder Rhein-Igel] which combines the qualities of both the canine and porcine varieties in itself and which has been found in

a Marx uses the English phrase "the milk of human kindness" which comes from Macbeth. Act I, Scene 5.— Ed.

b Wilhelm Tell. Act Î, Scene 4.— Ed. c Marx uses the English phrase. For more about Ulloa see Engels' letter written to Marx approximately July 23, 1860, present edition, Vol. 41.— Ed.

[^1]: d Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. e Sir John Falstaff was addressed as Jack by his drinking mates.— Ed.





**[p. 41]**

a hole on the River Arve, the country-seat of Humboldt-Vogt. Was this Ran-Igel aimed at our Ranickel?

N.B. The only refugee in Geneva with whom I had any contact was Dr. Ernst Dronke, a former co-editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung42 and at present a businessman in Liverpool. He was opposed to the activities of the "Bristlers".

The following letters from Imandt and Schily I would only preface with the remark that, on the outbreak of the revolution, Imandt left university in order to take part as a volunteer in the war in Schleswig-Holstein. In 1849 Schily and Imandt led the storming of the arsenal in Prüm43 and from there they forced a passage to the Palatinate with their troops and the weapons they had seized. There they joined the ranks of the army of the Imperial Constitution. Having been expelled from Switzerland in the early summer of 1852 they made their way to London.

"Dundee, February 5, 1860 "Dear Marx,

"I am at a loss to understand how Vogt can attempt to connect you with affairs in Geneva. It was common knowledge among the refugees there that of all of us only Dronke was in communication with you. The Brimstone Gang was before my time and the only name I can recall in connection with it is Borkheim.

"The Bristlers were the Genevan Workers' Association. The name originated with Abt. At the time the Association served as nursery for Willich's secret league of which I was chairman. When, at my instigation, Abt was found by the Workers' Association, to which many refugees belonged, to be a scoundrel and unworthy to associate with refugees and workers, he published a lampoon shortly afterwards in which he accused Schily and myself of the absurdest crimes. Whereupon we revived the whole affair in a different place and before a completely different audience. He rejected our demand that he should come forward with proofs to back up his libellous allegations, and without its being necessary for Schily or myself to say a word in our own defence, Dentzel proposed a motion that Abt be declared an infamous slanderer. The motion was approved unanimously for a second time, on this occasion by a meeting of refugees consisting almost entirely of parliamentarians. I am sorry that my tale is so very meagre, but it is the first time in eight years that I have had cause to think back to all that trash. I would not like to be condemned to write about it and / shall be most astonished if you can bring yourself to immerse your hand in such a brew.

"Adieu,

Your Imandt"

A well-known Russian writer3 who had been on very friendly terms with Herr Vogt during his stay in Geneva, wrote to me very much along the lines of the concluding words of the above letter:

[^1]: a Nikolai Ivanovich Sazonov.— Ed.





**[p. 42]**

"Mon cher Marx!

"J'ai appris avec la plus vive indignation les calomnies qui ont été répandues sur votre compte et dont j'ai eu connaissance par un article de la Revue contemporaine, signé Edouard Simon? Ce qui m'a particulièrement étonné c'est que Vogt, que je ne croyais ni bête, ni méchant, ait pu tomber dans l'abaissement moral que sa brochure révèle. Je n'avais besoin d'aucun témoignage pour être assuré, que vous étiez incapable de basses et sales intrigues, et il m'a été d'autant plus pénible de lire ces diffamations que dans le moment même où on les imprimait, vous donniez au monde savant la première partie du beau travailb qui doit renouveler la science économique et la fonder sur des nouvelles et plus solides bases Mon cher Marx, ne vous occupez plus de toutes ces misères; tous les hommes sérieux, tous les hommes consciencieux sont pour vous, mais ils attendent de vous autre chose que des polémiques stériles; ils voudraient pouvoir étudier le plus tôt possible la continuation de votre belle œuvre.— Votre succès est immense parmi les hommes pensants et s'il vous peut être agréable d'apprendre le retentissement que vos doctrines trouvent en Russie, je vous dirai qu'au commencement de cette année le professeur—' a fait à Moscovie un cours public d'économie politique dont la première leçon n'a pas été autre chose que la paraphrase de votre récente publication.44 Je vous adresse un numéro de La Gazette du Nord, où vous verrez combien votre nom est estimé dans mon pays. Adieu, mon cher Marx, conservez-vous en bonne santé et travaillez comme par le passé, à éclairer le monde, sans vous préoccuper des petites bêtises et des petites lâchetés. Croyez à l'amitié de votre dévoué"d

a "Un tableau de moeurs politiques en Allemagne. Le procès de M. Vogt avec la gazette d'Augsbourg", Revue contemporaine, February 15, 1860. For Marx's analysis of this article see this volume, pp. 93-94, 112-13.— Ed.

b The reference is to Marx's work A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (see present edition, Vol. 30).— Ed.

contemporaine signed by Edouard Simon. What has astonished me most of all is that Vogt whom I thought to be neither stupid nor malicious should have morally sunk so low as his pamphlet reveals. I need no evidence to persuade me that you are incapable of base and sordid intrigues and it was all the more painful to read these slanders when, at the very moment they were being printed, you were presenting to the learned world the first part of the admirable work which will give new life to the science of economics and provide it with new and more solid foundations My dear Marx, you must ignore all this wretched pettiness; all serious men, all scrupulous men are on your side, but they expect something other than sterile polemics from you; they would like to study the continuation of your admirable work as soon as possible.—Among thinking men your success is enormous, and if it gives you pleasure to hear of the echo your works have found in Russia, I can tell you that at the beginning of this year Professor— gave a course of public lectures on political economy in Moscow, the first hour of which was nothing but a paraphrase of your recent publication. I am sending you an issue of La Gazette du Nord from which you will be able to see how high your reputation stands in my

[^1]: c Ivan Kondratyevich Babst.— Ed. d "My dear Marx, I have learnt with the greatest indignation of the slanders that have been circulated about you and of which I was apprised by an article in the Revue





**[p. 43]**

"Vaut-il la peine que vous vous occupiez de toutes ces bavardises?"3

I have briefly indicated in the Preface my reasons for immersing my hand in Vogt's brew (to use Imandt's forceful expression) despite these and similar attempts at dissuasion.

To return to our Bristlers. The following letter from Schily is printed here verbatim, not even omitting the parts that do not refer to "nos moutons". I have however shortened the description of the Brimstone Gang since it would merely repeat what we already know from Borkheim's account, and certain other passages have been saved for later as I must to some extent treat "my agreeable subject" artistically and not blurt all my secrets out at once.

"Paris, February 8, 1860 46 Rue Lafayette "Dear Marx,

"It was very agreeable to have a direct sign of life from you in the shape of your letter of January 31 b and you will find me all the more ready to give you the information you require about these episodes in Geneva as I intended to write to you about them proprio motu.c The first thing that struck me, and not only me but also all my Geneva acquaintances here with whom I had occasion to discuss the matter, was that Vogt, as you write, lumps you together with people who are quite unknown to you. And so, in the interests of the truth, I had taken upon myself the task of conveying to you the relevant information about the 'Bristlers', the 'Brimstone Gang', etc. So you can see that both your questions: '(1) Who were the Bristlers and what were their activities? and (2) What was the Brimstone Gang, who belonged to it, what did they do?' came at a very opportune moment. I must begin by pointing out, however, that you are guilty of an error in chronology, for priority belongs by rights to the Brimstone Gang. If it was Vogt's wish 'to have a bit of fun' and terrify the German philistines by conjuring up the devil or even by calling down fire and brimstone on their heads, he should have found rather more diabolical figures for his models than those harmless and jolly ale-house geniuses to whom we, the senior members of the Geneva emigration, used to refer jokingly and without any unfriendly ulterior motive as the Brimstone Gang, a title which they too accepted in good part. They were the merry sons of the Muses who had taken their examina and done their exercitia practica in the various South German putsches, finishing up in the campaign for the Imperial Constitution. After the failure they were gathering strength in Geneva in the company of their examiners and instructors in revolution for the time when business would be resumed It is

country. Adieu, my dear Marx, keep in good health and labour as in the past for the enlightenment of the world without concerning yourself with petty stupidities and petty acts of cowardly malice. I remain your devoted friend" — Ed.

a "Is it really worth yoitr while to bother your head with all this tittle-tattle?" (From Szemere's letter of February 5, 1860.) — Ed.

[^1]: b Marx's letter to Schily dated January 31 is not available.— Ed. c Of my own accord.— Ed.





**[p. 44]**

"The activities of the Gang may be more or less summed up in the words: toiling in the vineyard of the Lord* In addition they edited the Rummeltipuff with its motto: Dwell in the land and thrive on red wine Vh In it they exercised their wit and humour on everything under the sun: they denounced false prophets, flayed the parliamentarians (inde iraec), and spared neither themselves nor us, their audience, but caricatured everyone whether friend or foe with an admirable conscientious- ness and impartiality.

"I do not need to tell you that they had no connection with you and never wore your Bundschuh.45 Nor can I conceal from you the fact that that footwear would have been little to their taste. These soldiers of the revolution were for the time being lounging around in the slippers of the armistice until the revolution itself would reanimate them and re-equip them with its own buskin (the seven-league boots of resolute progress).46 And anyone who had been so bold as to disturb their siesta with Marxist political economy, workers' dictatorship, etc., would have been given a very cool reception indeed. For Heaven knows, the work they did required nothing further than a Master of Ceremonies and their economic researches were confined almost entirely to the 'jug' and its reddish contents. One of their members, Backfisch, an honest farrier from the Odenwald, once expressed the opinion that 'the right to work was all very well, but the duty to work was one he would prefer to be spared'

"Let us then replace the sacrilegiously abused tombstone of the Brimstone Gang. To prevent anv further desecration of their grave a Hafiz should be employed to sing the requiescat in paceß But, failing that, may they herewith accept this obituary pro viatico et epitaphioe: 'They knew the smell of powder.' Whereas their sacrilegious historiographer has merely managed to smell out brimstone.

"The Bristlers first emerged at a time when the Brimstone Gang only lived on verbally in legend, in the records of Genevan philistines and the hearts of Genevan beauties. The brushmakers and bookbinders, Sauernheimer, Kamm, Ranickel, etc., came into conflict with Abt. When Imandt, myself and others resolutely took their side we too became the targets of his hostility. Abt was then summoned to appear before a general assembly of refugees and members of the Workers' Association, combined to form a cour des pairs1 or a haute cour de justices Abt did in fact appear

a Matthew 20:4.— Ed. b A pun on Psalm 37:3. Proverbia (in German): "Dwell in the land and verily thou shalt be fed" (lit. "feed thyself honestly" in Luther's version). Schily replaced redlich (honestly) with rötlich, literally "reddishly".— Ed.

c Hence the outcry (Juvenal, Satires, Book I, Satire 1).— Ed. à Rest in peace. Psalms 4:9.— Ed. e For their extreme unction and epitaph.— Ed. f Court of peers.— Ed. s High court.— Ed.



**[p. 45]**

and not only failed to provide proof of the accusations he had hurled at various people, but even declared quite openly that he had made them up quite arbitrarily, as reprisals for just as arbitrary accusations that his enemies had levelled at him: 'Tit for tat, reprisals make the world go round!'—was his view of the matter. Having made a valiant plea for his system of tit for tat, thoroughly convincing the noble peers of the great practical advantages to be derived from it, and after proofs of the accusations against him had been brought, he was declared to have confessed his malicious slanders, was found guilty of the other misdeeds imputed to him and was formally outlawed. In revenge he christened the noble peers, originally only the above-named guild-members, the ' Biirstenheimers' [Bristlers], which, as you see, is a happy combination of the trade and name of the first-named. You should revere him, therefore, as the progenitor of the family of Bürstenheim, without however your being in a position to claim to be one of or related to the clan, whether the term is applied to the guild or the peerage. For you ought to know that those of them that did busy themselves with 'organising the revolution' did so not as your supporters but as your opponents. They revered Willich as God the Father or as their Pope and anathematised you as the Antichrist or antipope, so that Dronke, who was regarded as your only supporter and legatus a latere3 in the diocese of Geneva, was excluded from all councils of the Church except the oenological ones, where he was primus inter pares. But the Bristlers, like the Brimstone Gang, were the merest Ephemeridae, and Druey had only to give one mighty puff and they scattered in all directions.

"The fact that a pupil of Agassizb should have got involved in these fossils of the Geneva emigration and have unearthed such fantastic tales as those served up in his pamphlet is the more astonishing since as regards the species of Bristleriana he actually possesses a perfect specimen in his own zoological cabinet in the shape of a mastodon of the order of ruminants: Ranickel, the very prototype of the Bristler. So the rumination seems to have been imperfectly performed, or else not properly studied by the above-mentioned pupil

"There you have all you asked for et au delà.0 But now I too should like to ask you something, namely your opinion about the wisdom of introducing an inheritance tax pro patria, vulgo: for the state. It would form the state's principal source of income, eliminate the taxes which at present burden the poorer classes and of course would only apply in cases of sizeable estates Besides this inheritance tax I am interested in two German institutions: 'the consolidation of landed property' and 'mortgage insurance', institutions which I wish were better appreciated in this country. At the present time they are not at all understood, for the French in general, with but few exceptions, when they gaze across the Rhine see nothing but nebulosities and sauerkraut. An exception was provided recently by L'Univers0* which, after lamenting immoderately about the fragmentation of landed property, added quite correctly: 'Il serait désirable qu'on appliquât immédiatement les remèdes énergiques, dont une partie de l'Allemagne s'est servie avec avantage: le remaniement obligatoire des propriétés partout où les 7/10 des propriétaires d'une commune réclament cette mesure. La nouvelle répartition facilitera le

a Cardinal, emissary. Dronke was sent to Switzerland as an emissary of the Communist League in the summer of 1850.— Ed.

b Vogt had been an assistant to the Swiss naturalist Agassiz.— Ed. c And more besides.— Ed. d The full title of the newspaper is L'Univers religieux, philosophique, politique, scientifique et littéraire.—Ed.



**[p. 46]**

"For the rest I let God's water flow freely over His land, give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's,c and even 'the Devil's share',d and remain your old affectionate friend,

Schily"

It follows from the foregoing that as there existed a "Brimstone Gang" in Geneva in 1849-50, and an association called the "Bristlers" in 1851-52, two societies connected neither with each other nor with myself, the revelations of our parliamentary clown about the existence of the "Brimstone Gang or Bristlers" are flesh of his flesh, a lie to the fourth power, "like the father that begets it: gross as a mountain, open, palpable".6 Just imagine a historian shameless enough to report: At the time of the first French Revolution there was a group of people known by the name of the

"Cercle social"41 or else by the no less characteristic title of "Jacobins".

As regards the life and deeds of the "Brimstone Gang or Bristlers" that he concocted, our merry joker was careful to keep the costs of their production down to a minimum. I shall give but a single instance of this:

"One of the chief occupations of the Brimstone Gang," the well-rounded one informs his astounded audience of philistines, "was to compromise people at home in Germany in such a way that they were forced to pay money and no longer resist the attempts to blackmail them" (a fine how-do-you-do48; "they were forced to no longer

a "It would be desirable that energetic remedies be introduced immediately, such as those that have proved so successful in part of Germany: the compulsory reorganisation of land holdings wherever it is demanded by 7/10 of the owners in a community. The new distribution of land would facilitate drainage, irrigation, the rational exploitation of the land and the planning of roads." — Ed.

b "Rural landowners, follow this advice! Hasten to demand the compulsory reorganisation of land holdings; rob the small owners to enrich the large ones. O fortvnatos nimium agricolas—too happy country-dwellers—sua si bona—if they only knew the advantages of the compulsory reorganisation of land holdings." (The Latin expression quoted here is a paraphrase from Virgil's poem Georgies.)—Ed.

c Matthew 22:21.— Ed. d Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act I, Scene 2.— Ed. e ibid., Act II, Scene 4.— Ed.



**[p. 47]**

Why did Vogt fail to print even "one" of these letters? Because the "Brimstone Gang" wrote "hundreds" of them. If threatening letters were as plentiful as blackberries3 Vogt would swear that we should have no threatening letter. If he were summoned to appear tomorrow before a court of honour of the Grütli Association49 to give an account of the "hundreds" of "threaten- ing letters", he would instead of producing a single letter pull a bottle of wine from his jerkin, smack his lips, cock a snook and with a great belly-laugh worthy of Silenus, he would exclaim like his Abt: "Tit for tat, reprisals make the world go round."

a Adaptation of Falstaff's "if reasons were as plentiful as blackberries" (Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene 4).— Ed.

