---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "1. Confession "
Page_Range: "73-75"
---

# 1. Confession 



**[p. 48]**

III

POLICE M A T T E R S

"Welch' Neues Unerhörtes hat der Vogt Sich ausgesonnen!"

(Schiller) * "I say quite bluntly," says Vogt, striking the gravest pose of which such a buffoon is capable, "I say quite bluntly: Everyone who engages in political machinations with Marx and his associates will sooner or later fall into the hands of the police. For these machinations are no sooner under way than they are made known and betrayed to the secret police and hatched out by them as soon as the time appears to be ripe" (these machinations are eggs, it would seem, and the police are the broody hens that hatch them out). "The instigators, Marx & Co., are of course sitting in London out of reach" (while the police are sitting on the eggs). "I would not be at a loss to provide proofs of this assertion" ("Magnum Opus", pp. 166, 167).b

Vogt is not "at a loss" [verlegen], Falstaff was never "at a loss" either. As "mendacious" [verlogen] as you please, but "at a loss""? Come, your "proofs" [Belege], Jack, your "proofs".0

1. CONFESSION

"Marx himself says on p. 77 of his pamphlet Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne,6 published in 1853: 'After 1849 just as before 1848, only one path was open to the proletarian party—that of secret association. Consequently after 1849 a whole series of clandestine proletarian societies sprang up on the Continent, were discovered by the police, condemned by the courts, broken up by the gaols and continually resuscitated by the force of circumstances.' Marx, " Vogt declares, "here euphemistically describes himself as 'circumstance'" ("Magnum Opus", p. 167).

Marx says, then, that "the police have discovered a whole series of secret societies since 1849" that were restored to life by the

a "What new, unheard-of plan has Vogt invented now?" (Wilhelm Tell, Act I, Scene 3.)—Ed.

b Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess The italics are Marx's.— Ed. c Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene 4.— Ed. d See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 446.— Ed.



**[p. 49]**

"Marx himself says." I shall now quote what Marx himself says in its proper context:

"With the defeat of the revolution of 1848-49 the party of the proletariat on the Continent lost use of the press, freedom of speech and the right to associate, i.e. the legal instruments of party organisation, which it had enjoyed for once during that short interval. The social status of the classes they represented enabled both the bourgeois-liberal and the petty-bourgeois democratic parties to remain united in one form or another and to assert their common interests more or less effectively despite the reaction. After 1849 just as before 1848, only one path was open to the proletarian party—that of secret association. Consequently after 1849 a whole series of clandestine proletarian societies sprang up on the Continent, were discovered by the police, condemned by the courts, broken up by the gaols and continually resuscitated by the force of circumstances. Some of these secret societies aimed directly at the overthrow of the existing state. This was fully justified in France Other secret societies aimed at organising the proletariat into a party, without concerning themselves with the existing governments. This was necessary in countries like Germany There is no doubt that here too the members of the proletarian party would take part once again in a revolution against the status quo, but it was no part of their task to prepare this revolution, to agitate, conspire or to plot for it The Communist League,51 therefore, was no conspiratorial society" (Revelations, etc.,52

Boston edition, pp. 62, 63).a

But our merciless Land-Vogt regards even "propaganda" as a crime, except of course for the propaganda organised by Pietri and Laity. Our Land-Vogt will even condone "agitation, conspira- cy and plotting", but only when its central office is in the Palais Royal53 with Hearty Harry, Heliogabalus Plon-Plon. But "prop- aganda" among proletarians! Fie!

After the above-quoted passage, so significantly mutilated by our Examining Magistrate Vogt, I continue in the Revelations as follows:

a See present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 445-46. Marx introduces additional italics and also bold type in quoting.— Ed.

