---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten "
Page_Range: "75-80"
---

# 2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten 



**[p. 50]**

And how does Vogt translate this passage into his "euphemistic" police mumbo-jumbo? Listen:

"As long as both" (parties) "cooperated, they worked, as Marx himself says, to create secret societies and to compromise societies and individuals on the

Continent" (p. 171).

Our fat rascal forgets only to quote the page in the Revelations where Marx "of course says this himself".

2. THE REVOLUTIONARY CONGRESS IN MURTEN

"Charles the Bold", our "bold Charles", vulgo Karl Vogt, now delivers his account of the defeat of Murten.55

"Large numbers of workers and refugees were cajoled and bullied" — namely by Liebknecht—"until finally [] it was agreed that there should be a revolutionary congress in Murten. The delegates of the branch societies were to assemble there in secret in order to confer about the final organisation of the League and the exact moment for the armed uprising. All preparations were made in absolute secrecy, the summonses were conveyed only by Liebknecht's trusted friends and correspond- ents. The delegates converged on Murten from all sides, on foot, by boat and by carriage, and were immediately welcomed by gendarmes, who knew in advance about the whats, the whys and the hows. The whole company that had been arrested in this manner was detained for a while in the Augustinian monastery in Fribourg and then transported to England and America. Herr Liebknecht was treated with quite exceptional consideration" ("Magnum Opus", p. 168).

a See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 449.— Ed. b " 'Twas said he was a liar and the father of lies" (Dante, The Divine Comedy, Inferno, Canto XXIII).— Ed.

[^1]: "Egli è bugiardo e padre di menzogna."b





**[p. 51]**

At the time I knew even less about "Herr Liebknecht" and his Swiss "revolutionary congresses" than about the drinking-meetings with mine host Benz in Kessler Street in Berne where the assembled parliamentarians regaled each other with the speeches they had made in St. Paul's Church,56 counted and distributed future posts of the Empire among themselves, and helped to while away the hard night of exile by listening to the lies, farces, ribaldry and rodomontades of Charles the Bold who, not without a touch of humour, awarded himself the letters patent of "Imperial Wine Bibber" in honour of an old German lay.

The "lay" begins with these words:

"Swaz ich trinken's hân gesehen,

daz ist gar von kinden geschehen: ich hân einen swëlch gesehen, dem wil ich meisterschefte jenen. "Den dûhten bêcher gar entwiht,

ër wolde näpf noch kophe niht. ër tranc ûz grôzen kannen. ër ist vor allen mannen ein Vorlauf allen swëlhen "von ûren und von ëlhen

Are fit alone for callow youth, But one great tippler has there been Fit to wear the crown in truth. "Normal cups he had forsworn, Pots and jugs he'd laugh to scorn, He would guzzle tankards tall, The staunchest drinkers he would balk,

He was the greatest of them all. "Neither bison nor the elk Could quaff their drink in such a gulp." (From the thirteenth-century comic poem "Weinschwelg". Marx quotes in Middle High German.)— Ed.

[^1]: wart solcher slünd nie niht getan."3

[^2]: a "The drink and drinking I have seen





**[p. 52]**

The facts of the matter are simply these: Liebknecht was—early in 1850—the President of the Geneva Workers' Association. He proposed a union of all the hitherto unconnected German workers' associations in Switzerland. The proposal was accepted. Whereupon it was decided to send a circular to twenty-four different workers' associations, inviting them to Murten to discuss the problems of the intended organisation and of establishing a joint newspaper. The debates in the Geneva Workers' Association, the circular, the discussions of the latter in the other twenty-four workers' associations—all this was done in public and the congress at Murten was likewise arranged in full view of the public. Had the Swiss authorities desired to ban it they could have done so four weeks before it was due to be held.^JBut the liberal Herr Druey, who was on the look-out for a victim* he could devour and thus placate the sabre-rattling Holy Alliance, preferred to have his police stage a coup de théâtre. Liebknecht, who as President of the Workers' Association had signed the document proclaiming the congress, was accorded the honour of being regarded as one of the chief ringleaders. He was separated from the other delegates, was granted free lodging in the uppermost turret of the tower in Fribourg, from where he enjoyed a fine view of the surrounding country, and he even had the privilege of walking for an hour each day upon the battlements. The only special feature of the way he was treated was the fact of solitary confinement. His repeated request to be allowed to join the other prisoners was repeatedly rejected. Vogt, however, knows full well that the police do not put their "moutons"* in solitary confinement, but place them as "agreeable companions" among the mass.

Two months later Liebknecht, together with a certain Gebert, was transported by the Fribourg Chief of Police to Besançon, where both he and his companion received a compulsory French passport to London, with the warning that if they deviated from the prescribed route they would be deported to Algiers. As a result of this unexpected journey Liebknecht lost most of the

[^1]: a Spies.— Ed.





**[p. 53]**

Plagiarism is a general characteristic of all the concoctions of our "bold hero", and this one is no exception. For the Swiss liberals invariably "liberalised" their acts of expulsion by accusing their victims of spying. After Fazy had expelled Struve he denounced him publicly as a "Russian spy". Likewise Druey, who accused Boichot of being a French mouchard. Tourte slandered Schily in a similar manner after he had suddenly had him arrested in the street in Geneva and sent to the tour des prisons in Berne. "Le commissaire maire federal Monsieur Kern exige votre expulsion"3

was the reply of the high and mighty Tourte when Schily asked the reason for the brutal treatment meted out to him. Schily:

"Alors mettez-moi en présence de Monsieur Kern."h Tourte: "Non, nous ne voulons pas que M. le commissaire fédéral fasse la police à Genève. "c The logic of this reply was altogether worthy of the letter this same Tourte, who was then Swiss Ambassador in Turin, wrote to the President of the Confederation0 informing him that Cavour was working with might and main to prevent the cession of Savoy and Nice at a time when this cession was already a fait accompli. But it is possible that certain diplomatic railway

a "The Federal Commissioner, Mayor Kern, demands your expulsion." — Ed. '•' "Very well, then, take me to M. Kern." — Ed. c "No, no, we won't have the Federal Commissioner playing policeman in Geneva." — Ed.

d See Correspondence Respecting the Proposed Annexation of Savoy and Nice to France, No. 34, p. 34, Hudson to Russell, received February 16, 1860.— Ed.



**[p. 54]**

At the very first representations of the German police, Swiss liberalism violated the right of asylum by driving out the so-called "leaders" — and this right of asylum had just been granted on condition that the remnant of the revolutionary army would refrain from fighting a last battle on Baden soil. But later, after the "leaders", it was the turn of the "misguided led". Thousands of Baden soldiers were given passports for home on false pretences and when they arrived there they were immediately welcomed by gendarmes, who knew in advance about "the whats, the whys and the hows". Then came the threats of the Holy Alliance and with them the police farce in Murten. But even the "liberal" Federal Council38 did not venture to go as far as the "bold Charles". Nothing at all about "revolutionary congress", "final organisation of the League", "exact moment for the armed uprising". The investigation which for propriety's sake had to be started, vanished into thin air.

"Threats of war" from abroad and "political-propagandistic tendencies", that was all the "embarrassed" Federal Council could stutter by way of excuse in its official report. (See Appendix 2.) The grand police actions of "Swiss liberalism" did not cease with the "revolutionary congress in Murten". On January 25, 1851 my friend Wilhelm Wolff ("Parliamentary Wolf" as he was known among the "Parliamentary Sheep") wrote to me from Zurich:

"The recent measures taken by the Federal Council have reduced the number of refugees from 11,000 to 500, and the Council will not rest until the remnant has been harried out of the country too, leaving only those who possess either a considerable fortune or powerful connections."

The refugees who had fought for the revolution stood in the most natural opposition to the heroes of St. Paul's Church who had talked it into the grave. The latter did not scruple to deliver their opponents into the hands of the Swiss police.

