---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "3. Cherval "
Page_Range: "80-89"
---

# 3. Cherval 

"Try to keep a few columns open in one of the Belgian newspapers for explanations, and do not fail to make the life of those rascally German dogs (the parliamentarians) in America miserable for having sold themselves to that goitrous diplomat ( Druey). "

It is now apparent what "Charles the Bold" meant when he said:

"I was labouring with all my strength to set limits to all these revolutionary antics and to provide the refugees with shelter, either on the Continent or overseas."*

The following description was to be found, long ago, in No. 257 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung dated

"Heidelberg, March 23, 1849: Our friend Vogt, 'champion* of the Left, imperial jester of the moment, imperial Barrot of the future, the 'faithful vvarner' against revolution — he has joined forces with —some like-minded people? By no means! But with a few reactionaries of the deepest dye and for what purpose? In order to convey or to deport to America all those 'characters' living in Strasbourg. Besançon and elsewhere on the German frontier What Cavaignac's iron rule imposes as a punishment these gentlemen would like to mete out in the name of Christian charity Amnesty is dead, long live deportation] And of course this was accompanied by the pia jraush that the refugees had themselves expressed the desire to emigrate, etc. But now the Seeblätter receives word from Strasbourg that these intentions to deport them have unleashed an angry storm of protest among all the refugees, etc. [] In fact thev all hope to return to Germany soon, even at the risk (as Herr Vogt touchmgly remarks) of having to join some 'mad escapade!"0

But enough of "Charles the Bold's" revolutionary congress in Murten.

3. CHERVAL

In my Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne an entire chapter is devoted to the Cherval plot.5'1 In it I show that Stieber with Cherval (a pseudonym for Cramer) as his instrument., and Carlier, Greif and Fieury as midwives, brought the so-called

a Carl Vogt, Mein Frozess, S. 165.— Ed. *' Pious deception.— Ed < Marx quotes the Neue Rheinische Zeitung from his notebook. There are some alterations in the use oi italics as compared with the original.— Ed.

'* Shakespeare, Henry JV, Part I, Ac! I, Scene 2. Marx quotes in English and gives the German translation.— Ed.

[^1]: "The virtue of this jest will be the incomprehen- sible lies that this same fat rogue will tell us." d





**[p. 56]**

So decisive were the proofs I delivered to the defence during the Cologne trial,60 so convincing the demonstration of a total lack of connection between Cherval, on the one hand, and the accused at Cologne and myself, on the other, that Stieber, who had sworn by Cherval on October 18 (1852), forswore him again on October 23, 1852 (Revelations, p. 29a). Driven into a corner he abandoned the attempt to link Cherval and his plot with us. Stieber was Stieber, but even Stieber was a far cry from Vogt.

I think it is quite unnecessary for me to repeat here the information I gave in the Revelations about the so-called Sep- tember plot. At the beginning of May 1852 Cherval returned to London, from where he had moved to Paris on business in the early summer of 1850. The Paris police let him escape from them a few months after he was sentenced in February 1852. In London he was greeted at first as a political martyr and welcomed into the German Workers' Educational Society, from which my friends and I had resigned as early as mid-September 1850.61 But this delusion was short-lived. The truth about his deeds of heroism in Paris soon became known and during that same month, May 1852, he was publicly expelled from the Society for his infamous conduct. The accused in Cologne, who had been imprisoned early in May 1851, were still in detention awaiting trial. I realised from a notice sent from Paris by the spy Beckmann to his paper, the Kölnische Zeitung, that the Prussian police were attempting retrospectively to forge a link between Cherval, his plot and the accused in Cologne. I accordingly kept on the look-out for reports about Cherval. It so happened that in July 1852 the latter offered his services as an Orleanist agent to M. de R.,b a former Minister during Louis Philippe's reign and a well-known eclectic philosopher. The connections which M. de R. retained in the Paris Prefecture of Police enabled him to obtain extracts from their dossier on

* I did not learn until after the Revelations were in print that de la Hodde (under the name Duprez) as well as the Prussian police agents Beckmann (then correspondent of the "Kölnische Zeitung") and Sommer were also involved.

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 420.— Ed. b Charles François Marie de Rémusat (see Marx's letter to Engels, July 13, 1852, present edition, Vol. 39).— Ed.





**[p. 57]**

Under pressure from Schneider II Stieber finally remembered on October 23 having heard that Cherval had fled from Paris, but he swore high and low that he had no knowledge of the present whereabouts of the Irishman or of his alliance with the Prussian police. In fact at that time Cherval was attached to Greif in London by a fixed weekly salary. The debates about the "Cherval mystery" at the Cologne Assizes, that had been provoked by my reports, drove Cherval from London. I heard that he had gone on a police mission to Jersey. I had long lost sight of him when by chance I came across a report from the Geneva correspondent of the Republik der Arbeiter^ which appears in New York, stating that Cherval had turned up in Geneva in March 1853 under the name of Nugent, and that he had vanished from there once more in the summer of 1854. He visited Vogt in Geneva, then, a few weeks after my Revelations with the compromising statements about him had been published in Basle by Schabelitz.

Let us now return to the Falstaffian travesty of history. According to Vogt, Cherval arrived in Geneva immediately after his fictitious escape from Paris and before that he was allegedly "sent" by the secret Communist League from London to Paris "a

a Cherval, called Frank, whose real name is Cramer.— Ed. b "Korrespondenzen. Genf, den 16. April 1854", Republik der Arbeiter, No. 22, May 27, 1854.— Ed.



**[p. 58]**

l73[-74]) and entered with him so to speak into a "scientific intercourse" as he had done earlier with Archduke John and was to do later with Plon-Plon. One day, while he was working in the "office" of the Imperial Regent,62 "Nugent" was recognised by an "acquaintance" as Cherval and accused of being an "agent provocateur". In fact Nugent was not only working for Vogt in Geneva but was also busily engaged in "founding a clandestine society".

"Cherval-Nugent presided, kept the minutes and corresponded with London" (loc. cit., p. 175). He had "taken a few not very discerning but otherwise worthy workers into his confidence" (ibid.), however "among the members there was also an associate of the Marx clique known to everyone as a suspect minion of the German police" (loc. cit.).

"All the friends" of Marx, from whom Cherval-Nugent "became inseparable", are now suddenly transformed into "one associate", and this one associate promptly dissolves again into "the associates of Marx who had remained behind in Geneva" (p. 176), with whom Nugent later "continues to correspond from Paris" and whom he magnetically "attracts to himself" in Paris (loc. cit.).

Yet another instance, then, of his favourite "transformation" of the buckram "cloth" of Kendal green!

What Cherval-Nugent purposed with his society was the

"mass production of forged banknotes and treasury bills which when put into circulation were expected to undermine the credit of the despots and ruin their finances" (loc. cit., p. 175).



**[p. 59]**

"Various stone and copper plates had already been engraved for this purpose by Nugent himself; the gullible members of the secret league had already been selected to go to France, Switzerland and Germany with packets of these"—stone and copper plates?—no—"these counterfeit banknotes" (the banknotes were, of course, put into packets before they were printed) (p. 175),

but Cicero-Vogt was already standing behind Cherval-Catiline with his sword drawn. A peculiar characteristic of all Falstaffs is that as well as big bellies they also have big mouths. Just look at our Gurgelgrosslinger who has already set limits to "revolutionary antics" in Switzerland and arranged for whole shiploads of refugees to find a livelihood overseas, look how he postures, how melodramatically he acts, how he magnifies Stieber's Paris skirmish with Cherval (see Revelations3)] Here he lay, and thus he bore his point! b

"The plan of the whole conspiracy" (loc. cit., p. 176) "had been monstrously conceived." "All the workers' associations were to have Cherval's project laid at their door." There had already been "some confidential inquiries from foreign embassies", they were already on the point of "compromising Switzerland, especially the Canton of Geneva".

But the Land-Vogt was vigilant. He carried out his first rescue of Switzerland, an experiment he later repeated several times with steadily increasing success.

" / cannot deny," the weighty man exclaims, "I cannot deny that I contributed a substantial part in frustrating these devilish plans; I cannot deny that I made use of the police of the Geneva Republic for this purpose; / regret to this day" (disconsolate Cicero) "that the zeal of some deluded enthusiasts served to warn the wily ringleader and enabled him to evade arrest" [p. 177].

But at all events, Cicero-Vogt had "frustrated" the Catiline conspiracy, rescued Switzerland, and "contributed" his substantial part (wherever he carries that). According to him Cherval reappeared in Paris a few weeks later and there "he made no attempt to hide himself, but showed himself in public like other citizens" (loc. cit., p. 176). And we all know how public is the life of the citizens of Paris in the counterfeit Empire.

a See present edition, Vol. 11.— Ed. b Falstaff's words (slightly paraphrased) from Shakespeare's Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene 4.— Ed.



**[p. 60]**

I rather regret that after Vogt's powerful Zachariad63 I must now give the following letter from Johann Philipp Becker. A veteran of the German emigration, active as a revolutionary from the Hambach Festival64 to the campaign for the Imperial Constitution, in which he fought as commander of the 5th Army Division (the Berlin Militär-Wochenschrift, a voice that is by no means partial, testified to his military achievement), Johann Philipp Becker is too well known to require any recommendation from me. I need only say, therefore, that his letter was written to R.,b a German businessman in London with whom I am on friendly terms, that I do not know Becker personally and that he has never been connected with me politically. Finally, I should note that I have omitted the opening section of his letter which deals with business matters as well as most of the passages referring to the "Brimstone Gang" and the "Bristlers" since we are already familiar with the material they contain. (The original of the letter is in Berlin along with other documents connected with my suit.)

"Paris, March 20, 1860

"I recently saw Vogt's pamphlet against Marx.c I found its contents very distressing, all the more so since, as I was living in Geneva at the time, I am perfectly familiar with the history of the so-called Brimstone Gang and the notorious Cherval. It is evident that the events have been totally distorted and with an utter disregard for justice have been falsely connected with the political activities of the economist Marx. I do not know Herr Marx personally, nor have I ever had any association with him whatever, but I have known Herr Vogt and his family for upwards of twenty years and am bound to him by much closer bonds of affection. I must bitterly deplore and unreservedly repudiate the frivolous and unscrupulous manner in which Vogt has entered the lists on this occasion. It is unworthy of a man to include distorted and even imaginary facts as weapons in his armoury. It is really very painful to see that Vogt unthinkingly, and apparently suicidally, destroys his congenial field of activity, compromises his position and stains his own reputation; and this would be the case even if he could be wholly acquitted of the charge of being in the pay of Napoleon. On the other hand, how gladly would I have seen him use every honest means to clear his name of such grave accusations. As it is, his behaviour hitherto in this unedifying business impels me to give you a description of the so-called Brimstone Gang-and the worthy Herr Cherval so that you may judge for yourself the extent to which Marx may be held responsible for their existence and their activities.

"A word, then, about the rise and fall of the Brimstone Gang, for scarcely

c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess— Ed.

[^1]: a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. b Georg Friedrich Rheinländer.— Ed.





**[p. 61]**

(What follows has been largely anticipated in the letters of Borkheim and Schily.)3

"This company, essentially a company of idlers, was referred to jestingly and mockingly as the Brimstone Gang. It was a club which consisted, as it were, of a motley crowd brought together by chance; it had neither president nor programme, neither statute nor dogma. There is no question of its having been a secret society, or of its having had any political or other goal to pursue systematically; they merely wanted to show off and that with an openness and frankness that knew no bounds. Nor did they have any connection with Marx, who for his part could certainly have known nothing of their existence and whose socio-political views moreover diverged widely from theirs. And in addition these fellows evinced a strong urge to be independent that verged on self-conceit and it is extremely unlikely that they would have been willing to subordinate themselves to any authority either in theory or in practice. They would have laughed Vogt's paternalistic admonitions out of court, no less than they would have ridiculed Marx's policy instructions. I was in a position to obtain very precise information about everything that went on in those circles since my eldest son b used to meet the Big White Chiefs every day In all, the whole farce of this gang, devoid of any ties,c scarcely outlasted the winter of 1849-50; the force of circumstances scattered our heroes to the winds.

"Who would have thought that after ten years' slumber the long-forgotten Brimstone Gang would be set alight once more by Professor Vogt in order to ward off imagined aggressors by spreading a foul stench which was then transmitted by obliging journalists with great enthusiasm acting as it were as electromagnetic- sympathetic conductors. Even Herr von Vincke, that liberal par excellence, mentioned the Brimstone Gang in connection with the Italian question and used it as an illustration in the modest Prussian Chamber. And the otherwise blameless citizens of Breslau in their sancta simplicitas have in honour of the Brimstone Gang prepared a carnival jest and fumigated the whole city with sulphur fires as the symbol of their loyalty.

"Poor innocent Brimstone Gang! After your blessed end you had willy-nilly to turn into a veritable volcano, to become the bogy that frightens timid subjects into a wholesome respect for the police, to vulcanise all the fat-heads of the world and blacken every overheated brain down to its roots—just as Vogt, in my opinion, has burnt his fingers for ever.

"Now then, as for Cramer, vulgo Cherval. This socio-political and common scoundrel came to Geneva in 1853, pretending to be an Englishman by the name

a See this volume, pp. 29-32, 43-46.— Ed. b Gottfried Becker.— Ed. c A pun in the original: bandlose Bande. Bandlose means "without ties", Bande means "band", "gang".— Ed.



**[p. 62]**

"From then on he avoided me whenever he could. In the meantime, with Stecher's aid, he organised evening dances in the bosom of the German Workers' Association, enlisting additional musical talent free of charge in the shape of an Italian, a Swiss and a Frenchman. At these balls I again met the Englishman, this time as a veritable maître de plaisirc and completely in his element; uproarious merriment and pleasing the ladies suited him much better than his leonine bravery. However, he was not politically active in the Workers' Association, where he did nothing but hop, skip and jump, drink and sing. In the meantime however I heard from Fritz, a goldsmith from Württemberg, that our 'intrepid revolutionary Englishman' had founded a League consisting of him (Fritz), another German, a few Italians and Frenchmen, making seven members in all. I implored Fritz to have nothing to do with this political tightrope-walker, at any rate as far as serious matters were concerned, and begged him both to resign from the League at once and induce his associates to do likewise. Some time later my bookseller sent me a

[^1]: a Information bureau.— Ed. b See Appendix 3 (p. 304 of this volume).— Ed. c Master of ceremonies.— Ed.





**[p. 63]**

"In Paris he engaged in decorating porcelain and since I was in the same line of trade I met him in the course of business. But I found him the same irresponsible and incorrigible windbag as before.

"But how Vogt could have dared to connect the Genevan activities of this rogue with those of Marx and to describe him as one of his confederates or tools is utterly beyond my comprehension, especially as this was supposed to have been at the very time that he was the object of such a violent attack by Marx in the pamphlet referred to above. It was after all Marx who unmasked him and who drove him from Geneva where, according to Vogt, he was actively engaged on Marx's behalf.

"When I reflect how it was possible for a scientist like Vogt thus to go astray my mind reels. Is it not lamentable to find the praiseworthy reputation brought about by a happy coincidence of events so recklessly destroyed in such a wasteful and sterile fashion! Would it be surprising if after witnessing such deeds the whole world were to receive Vogt's scientific researches with scepticism, suspecting all the while that he might have arrived at his scientific conclusions with the same recklessness and the same lack of scruple, basing them on erroneous notions rather than on positive facts, painstakingly studied?

"If to become a statesman and a scientist nothing but ambition were required even Cramer might become both. Unfortunately, with his Brimstone Gang and his Cherval, Vogt has degenerated into a sort of Cherval himself. And indeed there are intrinsic similarities between the two, brought about by their hankering for material comfort, for the safety of their own persons, for the joys of conviviality and for frivolous trifling with serious matters In anticipation of friendly news from you I send you my warmest greetings.

"Yours,

/. Ph. Becker

a Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see present edition, Vol. 11).—Ed.

