---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "4. The Communist Trial in Cologne "
Page_Range: "89-93"
---

# 4. The Communist Trial in Cologne 



**[p. 64]**

"Furthermore, I also saw in the pamphlet that he claims that Nugent-Cherval- Crämer came to Geneva on a mission for Marx.a I must add therefore that he did not drop the pretence of being an Englishman up to the very last moment in Geneva and that he never gave the slightest indication that he had ever had any contact whatever with any German emigrant, which would in any case have scarcely been reconcilable with his wish to preserve his incognito. Even here and now, when the matter must have lost its former significance for him, he is reluctant to admit his German origin and steadfastly denies all earlier acquaintance with Germans.

"Hitherto I still believed that Vogt had light-mindedly allowed himself to be mystified by others, but now his actions increasingly seem to be motivated by malicious perfidy. I am less sorry for him than before and my sympathy is reserved now for his worthy and good old fatherb who will suffer many a bitter moment because of this business.

"I will not only permit you, I actually request you to make known this information among your circle of acquaintances in the interest of truth and of the good cause.

"With warm greetings,

Yours,

/. Philipp B." (See Appendix 3.)

4. THE COMMUNIST TRIAL IN COLOGNE

From the "office" of the Regent of the Empire in Geneva to the Royal Prussian Court of Assizes in Cologne.

"In the Cologne trial Marx played an outstanding part." Undoubtedly.

"In Cologne his confederates were on trial."c Granted.

The Cologne accused were held in detention for 11/2 years pending the trial.

The Prussian police and the Embassy, Hinckeldey with his entire clan, postal and municipal authorities, the Ministries of the Interior and of Justice—all made the most strenuous efforts during these 1 l/2 years to give birth to a corpus delicti.

Here then, in his research into my "activities", Vogt has at his disposal, as it were, the assistance of the Prussian state and he even had authentic material contained in my Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne, Basle, 1853, a copy of which he discovered in the Geneva Workers' Association and which he borrowed and "studied". This time, then, young Karl really will

a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 176.— Ed. b Philipp Friedrich Wilhelm Vogt.— Ed. c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 169-70.— Ed.

"The Cologne trial is of no particular significance for us"a ("Magnum Opus", p. 172).

In the Revelations I was compelled to attack Herr August Willich among other people. Willich commenced his defence in the Neu'-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung of October 28, 1853** by describing my work as "a masterly critique of the savage procedures adopted by the central police of the German Confederation"}' Jacob Schabelitz fils, the publisher of the pamphlet, wrote to me from Basle on December 11, 1852 after receiving the manuscript:

"Your exposure of the perfidy of the police is unsurpassable. You have erected a permanent monument to the present regime in Prussia."0

He added that his judgment was shared by experts, chief among these "experts" being a man who is at present a Genevan friend of Herr Karl Vogt.

Seven years after the publication of the Revelations Herr Eichhoff of Berlin, whom I do not know at all, made the following statement in court (it is well known that Eichhoff was on trial,65

accused of having slandered Stieber):

"He had made a detailed study of the Cologne communist trial and not only adhered to his original opinion that Stieber had committed perjury but had to extend it to assert that everything Stieber said during the trial was false The verdict passed on the accused in Cologne was due entirely to Stieber's testimony Stieber's whole testimony was perjury from start to finish" (first supplement to the Berlin Vossische Zeitung, May 9, 1860).d

* " Smoke -bombs or stink-bombs are used chiefly in mine warfare. One works with an ordinary flare-charge which must however contain rather more sulphur than usual and as much feathers, horn, hair and other rubbish as the charge will take. This is put in a container and the shell fired with a fuse" (F. C. Plümicke, Handbuch für die Königlich Preussischen Artillerie-Offiziere, Erster Teil, Berlin, 1820).

** I replied with a pamphlet called The Knight of the Noble Consciousness, New York, 1853. [See present edition, Vol. 12.]

a Italics by Marx.— Ed. h This refers to August Willich's slanderous article "Doctor Karl Marx und seine Enthüllungen", published in the Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, October 28 and November 4, 1853.— Ed.

c See present edition, Vol. 39. Marx gives a summary rather than the exact words of the quoted passage.— Ed.

d Karl Wilhelm Eichhoff [,Erklärung vor dem Criminalgericht 8.-15. Mai 1860], Königlich privilegierte Berlinische Zeitung von Staats- und gelehrten Sachen, No. 108 (supplement), May 9, 1860.— Ed.



**[p. 66]**

"He" (Marx) "did everything in his power to provide the defence with the materials and instructions necessary for the conduct of their case"

It is a known fact that "false documents, manufactured by the agents themselves", i. e. Stieber, Fleury, etc., "were presented to the court" (in Cologne) "as 'evidence' and that in general an abyss of perfidy was exposed among this police rabble that makes one shudder to contemplate" ("Magnum Opus", pp. 169, 170).

If Vogt can show his hatred of the coup d'état by making propaganda for Bonapartism, why should not I reveal "my collusion" with the secret police by exposing their abysmal perfidy? If the police had genuine proofs, why manufacture false ones?

But, lectures Professor Vogt,

"nevertheless the blow only fell on the members of the Marxian League in Cologne, only on the Marx party".

Indeed, Polonius! Had not the blow fallen on another party earlier on in Paris; did it not also strike another party later on in Berlin (the Ladendorf trial), and yet another in Bremen (League of the Dead),66 etc., etc.?

As to the verdict passed on the Cologne accused I shall quote a relevant passage from my Revelations:

"The miracles performed by the police were originally necessary to conceal the completely political nature of the trial. 'The revelations you are about to witness, Gentlemen of the Jury,' said Saedt when opening for the prosecution, 'will prove to you that this trial is not a political trial.' But now" (at the conclusion of the case) "he emphasises its political character so that the police revelations should be forgotten. After the 1 72-year preliminary investigation the jury needed objective evidence in order to justify itself before public opinion.

"After the five-week-long police comedy they needed 'politics pure and simple' to extricate themselves from the sheer mess. Saedt therefore did not only confine himself to the material that had led the Indictment Board to the conclusion that 'there was no factual evidence of an indictable offence'. He went even further. He attempted to prove that the law against conspiracy does not require any indictable action, but is simply a law with a political purpose, and the category of conspiracy is therefore merely a pretext for burning political heretics in a legal way. The success of his attempt promised to be all the greater because of the decision to apply the new [Prussian] Penal Code that had been promul- gated after the accused had been arrested. On the pretext that this code contained extenuating provisions the servile court was able to



**[p. 67]**

"With the unmasking of the minute-book" forged and planted by the Prussian police themselves "the case had advanced to a new stage. The jury was no longer free merely to find the defendants guilty or not guilty; they must either find the defendants guilty—or the government.

"To acquit the accused would mean condemning the government" (loc. cit., p. 70).a

That the Prussian Government of the day put a similar construction on the situation is plain from a communication that Hinckeldey sent to the Prussian Embassy in London while the Cologne trial was still in progress. In this he said that "the whole existence of the political police depended on the outcome of the trial". He accordingly asked for a person who could appear in court in the guise of the witness H.b (who had disappeared), for which performance he would receive 1,000 talers reward. This person had actually been found when Hinckeldey's next letter arrived:

"The State Prosecutor hopes that thanks to the happy constitution of the jury it will be possible to get a verdict of guilty even without further extraordinary measures, and he" (Hinckeldey) "therefore asks you not to trouble yourselves further." (See Appendix 4.)

It was in fact the happy constitution of the jury in Cologne which inaugurated the Hinckeldey-Stieber regime in Prussia. "A blow will be struck in Berlin if the Cologne accused are condemned" was the view of the police rabble attached to the Prussian Embassy in London, as early as October 1852, even though the police mine (the Ladendorf conspiracy) did not explode in Berlin until the end of March 1853. (See Appendix 4.)

The liberal outcry that follows an age of reaction is all the louder the greater the cowardice displayed by liberals in putting up with the reaction for years on end without protest. Thus at the time of the Cologne trial, all my efforts to expose Stieber's system of deception in the liberal Prussian press were unavailing. The motto of the press, printed on its banner in block letters, ran: Reliability is the first duty of the citizen, and in this sign shalt thou—live.67

a See Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 454-55, 453). Except for the words "pure and simple", the italics were introduced by Marx in Herr Vogt.—Ed.

[^1]: b Hermann Wilhelm Haupt.— Ed.



