---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "5. Joint Festival of the German Workers' Educational Associations in Lausanne ( June 26 and 27, 1859) "
Page_Range: "93-97"
---

# 5. Joint Festival of the German Workers' Educational Associations in Lausanne ( June 26 and 27, 1859) 



**[p. 68]**

(JUNE 26 AND 27, 1859)

Our hero takes to his heels and with undiminished pleasure he retreats to—Arcadia. We meet him again in a "secluded corner of Switzerland", in Lausanne, at a "Joint Festival" of a number of German workers' educational associations which took place towards the end of June. Here Karl Vogt saved Switzerland for the second time. While Catiline was sitting in London, our Cicero with the gay-coloured jacket thundered in Lausanne:

"Jam, jam intelligis me acrius vigilare ad salutem, quam te ad perniciem reipublicae."3

By happy chance there exists an authentic report on the above-mentioned "Joint Festival" and on the deed of valour performed during it by our "well-rounded character". Written by Herr G. Lommel with the collaboration of Vogt, it is entitled Das Centralfest der Deutschen Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der Westschweiz (Lausanne 1859), Geneva, 1859, Markus Vaney, rue de la Croix d'or. Let us compare the authentic report with the "Magnum Opus", which appeared five months later. The report contains Cicero-Vogt's speech "delivered by himself" and in it he begins by explaining the mystery of his presence at this gathering. He appears among the workers, he harangues them, because

"grave accusations have latterly been made against him, accusations which, if they were true, were bound utterly to destroy the confidence placed in him and completely undermine all his political activities". "I have come," he goes on, "I have specifically come here to protest publicly against the" (above-mentioned) "malicious underhand dealings" (Report, pp. 6-7).

He has been accused of Bonapartist intrigues, he has to rescue his political activities and as is his wont he defends his skin with his tongue. After indulging in empty talk for an hour and a half, he recollects Demosthenes' admonition that "action, action and once again action is the soul of eloquence".b

But what is action? In America there is a small animal called a skunk which has only one method of defending itself at moments of extreme danger: its offensive smell. When attacked it releases a substance from certain parts of its body which, if it touches your clothes, will ensure that they have to be burnt and, if it touches

a "You will already be aware that I attend with greater zeal to the salvation of the state than you to its destruction" (Cicero, Speeches against Catiline, I, 4).— Ed.

b Demosthenes, The Olynthiac, Second Speech, Chapter Four.— Ed.



**[p. 69]**

That is what action is, says our orator, a naturalised citizen of the "Kingdom of Animals",3 and bespatters his supposed perse- cutors with the following skunk-like effluent:

"But I would like to warn you of one thing above all else, and that is of the machinations of a small group of depraved men whose aims and efforts are all directed towards seducing the worker away from his job, implicating him in conspiracies and communist intrigues, and finallv, after living from the sweat of his brow, driving him cold-bloodedly" (i. e. after he has finished sweating) "'to his destruction. Now once again this small group is using everv possible method" (just keep it as general as possible!) "to ensnare the workers' associations in its toils. Whatever they mav say" (about Vogts Bonapartist intrigues) "you may rest assured that their true aim is to exploit the worker for their own selfish ends and finally to abandon him to his fate" I Report, p. IS. See Appendix).

The shameless impertinence with which this "skunk" accuses me and my friends of "living from the sweat of the workers' brow", when we have alwavs sacrificed our private interests in order to defend those ot the working class, and have done this gratis, is not even original. The mouchards of the December Gang hurled similar slanders at Louis Blanc, Blanqui, Raspail, etc. And not only that, for at all times and in ail places the sycophants of the ruling class have always resorted to these despicable slanders to denigrate the literary and political champions of the oppressed classes. {See Appendix 5.)

After this action our "well-rounded character" is incidentally no longer able to keep a straight face. The buffoon goes on to compare his "persecutors" who are walking about freelv, with the "Russians taken prisoner at Zorndorf".h68 And he compares himself with—who would have guessed it!—Frederick the Great. Falstaff- Vogt remembers that Frederick the Great ran away from the first battle at which he was present. How much greater then is he who ran away without even waiting for the battle.*

* Kobes I 69 relates in Jacob Venedey's pamphlet Pro domo und pro patria gegen Karl Vogt, Hanover, 1860: "He was a witness to the fact that the Imperial Regent,

;1 An allusion to the title of Karl Vogt's book, Untersuchungen über Thierstaaten, in which the author treats his subject as a vulgar materialist.— Ed.

[^1]: h (ieorg Lommel, op. cit., S. 19.— Ed.





**[p. 70]**

la Eulenspiegel he serves up five months later for the benefit of the German philistines.

" They wanted at all costs to create complications in Switzerland; some sort of blow was to be aimed at the policy of neutrality. J was informed that the Joint Festival of the Workers' Educational Associations was to be used to induce the workers to follow a route which they had firmly rejected. It was hoped that the lovely Festival would provide an opportunity for forming a secret committee to enter into communication with like-minded people in Germany and take God knows what steps" (Vogt does not know, even though he was informed). "There were all sorts of dark rumours and mysterious talk about the active intervention of the workers in German political affairs. I at once resolved to oppose these intrigues and to exhort the workers anew to turn a deaf ear to all proposals of this sort. At the conclusion of the speech referred to above 1 gave a solemn warning, etc." ("Magnum Opus", pp. 180 [-81]).

Cicero-Vogt has already forgotten that at the start of his speech he let slip what had brought him to the Joint Festival—not the neutrality of Switzerland but the need to save his own skin. His speech does not contain a single word about the intended plot against Switzerland, the conspiratorial intentions at the Joint Festival, the secret committee, the active intervention of the workers in German politics or proposals of "this" or any other 'sort". Not a word about all these Stieberiads. His final warning was nothing but the warning of the honest Sikes in the Old Bailey who warned the jurymen not to listen to the "infamous" detectives who had caught him stealing.

"The events which immediately followed," Falstaff-Vogt declares ("Magnum Opus", p. 181), "confirmed my forebodings.''

Karl Vogt, was not present when we and the four other Imperial Regents forced the Government of Württemberg to bring the Parliament to an honourable end with sword and bayonet. It is an amusing story. The other four Imperial Regents had already entered the carriage to go to the Assembly Room, as agreed, and there together with the Rump Parliament [J to put on a bold front" (it is well known that the Rump Parliament had no head). [Venedey says here: die Brust bieten (literall), to present the breast). The phrase is an adaptation of the German idiomatic expression die Stirn bieten (to present the forehead) which means 'to put on a bold front" Marx puns on Venedey's substitution of Brust (breast) tor Stirn (forehead) to sires- that the Rump Parliament had no head.] "Karl Vogt slammed the carriage-dooi shut and called to tut coachman: 'You go on ahead, the carriage is full up. 1 shall follow on!' But Kar! Vogt only appeared [] after all possible danger was over' (ioc. cit., pp. 23, 2ij,

;1 Johann Fischart. Affentheurliche. Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung, S. 73.—'Ed.



**[p. 71]**

"An article in the Allgemeine Zeitung imputed tendencies to the Festival and to the life of the workers which these" (i. e. the Festival and the life) "did not in the least have in mind." (Just as Vogt had imputed tendencies to the Murten Congress and the workers' organisations in general.) "This article and a reprint of it in the Frankfurter Journal led to a confidential inquiry from the Ambassador of a South German state in which the Festival was given the importance" — "imputed" to it by the article in the Allgemeine Zeitung and the reprint in the Frankfurter Journal?—by no means! — "which it ought to have had if the intentions of the Brimstone Gang had not been frustrated." b

Ought to have had! Yes indeed! Although the most superficial comparison of the "Magnum Opus" and the authentic report on the Joint Festival is enough to clear up the mystery of Cicero-Vogt's second rescue of Switzer- land, I nevertheless wished to ascertain whether there was any factual basis, however slender, that might have given him the "matter" which provided him with his "energy".70 I wrote, therefore, to the editor of the authentic report, Herr G. Lommel in Geneva.c Herr Lommel must have been on friendly terms with

Vogt since he not only collaborated with him on the report on the Joint Festival in Lausanne but also, in a subsequent pamphlet about the Schiller and Robert Blum memorial celebrations in Geneva,d he covered up the fiasco that Vogt had brought upon himself there. In his reply of April 13, 1860, Herr Lommel, who is personally unknown to me, wrote:

" Vogt's story that he had frustrated a dangerous conspiracy in Lausanne is the sheerest fairy-tale or lie; he only went to Lausanne because it was an opportunity to make a speech which he could afterwards print. In the speech, which lasted 1 V2 hours, he defended himself against allegations that he was in the pay of Bonaparte. I still have the manuscript in safe keeping."

a An allusion to Goethe's Faust, Erster Teil, Marthens Garten. But instead of Goethe's du ahnungsvoller (foreboding) Engel Marx has du ahndungsvoller (vengeful)

Engel.—Ed.

b Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 181, 182. In the last sentence the italics are Vogt's. He is referring to the article in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 215 (supplement), August 3, 1859.— Ed.

c Marx to Lommel, April 9, 1860 (present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed. d Georg Lommel, Das Centralfest der Deutschen Arbeiterbildungsvereine in der Westschweiz, Genf, 1859.— Ed.

[^1]: 4-1305



