---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "6. Miscellany "
Page_Range: "97-100"
---

# 6. Miscellany 



**[p. 72]**

"Il faut connaître cet individu" (namely Vogt), "surtout le faiseur, l'homme important, toujours hors de la nature et de la vérité."3

Vogt himself declares on p. 99 of his so-called Studien0 that he "had never laid claim to prophetic gifts". But we know from the Old Testament that the ass could see what the prophet had missed.0 And so we can understand how Vogt managed to see the conspiracy which in November 1859 he had forebodings of having "frustrated" in June 1859.

6. MISCELLANY

"If my memory does not deceive me," our Parliamentary Clown writes, "the circular" (i. e. an alleged address to the proletarians dated London 1850) "was indeed written by a follower of Marx's known as Parliamentary Wolf, and it was allowed to fall into the hands of the Hanover police. Here too we find this same channel turning up in the history of the circular 'of the patriots to the men of Gotha'" ("Magnum Opus", p. 144).

A channel turns up! A prolapsus ani,d perhaps, you zoological jester?

As to "Parliamentary Wolf"—and we shall see later on why, like a bad dream, Parliamentary Wolf weighs so heavily on the memory of our Parliamentary Clown—he published the following statement in the Berlin Volks-Zeitung, the Allgemeine Zeitung and the Hamburg Reform:

"Statement. Manchester, February 6, 1860: I see from the letter of a friend that the National-Zeitung (No. 41 of this year) has brought the following passage to the attention of the public in a leading article based on Vogt's pamphlet:

"'In 1850 another circular was dispatched from London to the proletarians in Germany, written, as Vogt believes he remembers, by Parliamentary Wolf, alias Casemate Wolf. The circular was allowed simultaneously to fall into the hands of the Hanover police.' I have seen neither the relevant issue of the National-Zeitung nor the Vogt pamphlet and would like therefore to direct my answer solely to the passage just cited:

" 1 . In 1850 I was living not in London but in Zurich, and I did not move to London until the summer of 1851.

"2. I have never in the whole of my life written a circular addressed either to 'proletarians' or to anyone else.

a "One must know this fellow who is above all a charlatan, a self-important, unnatural, untruthful man." — Ed.

b Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, Genf und Bern, 1859, S. 99. Marx's italics.— Ed.

c Numbers 22 : 21-33.— Ed. d Prolapse of the rectum.— Ed.



**[p. 73]**

W. Wolff a

There you are: just as Cuvier could construct the whole skeleton of an animal from a single bone, Wolff has correctly constructed Vogt's whole fabrication from a single fragmentary quotation. Karl

Vogt can indeed stand beside Chenu and de la Hodde as primus inter pares.

The last "proof" adduced by Vogt, who is still "by no means at a loss", to demonstrate my entente cordiale with the secret police in general and "my relations with the Kreuz-Zeitung party in particular", consists in the argument that my wife is the sister of the retired Prussian Minister Herr von Westphalen ("Magnum Opus", p. 194). Now how to parry the cowardly stratagem of our fat Falstaff? Perhaps the Clown will forgive my wife the cognate Prussian Minister15 when he learns of the agnate Scotsmanc who was beheaded in the market-place in Edinburgh as a rebel in the war of liberation against James II. It is well known that it is only by accident that Vogt still carries his own head around. For at the Robert Blum celebrations of the German Workers' Educational Association in Geneva (November 13, 1859) he reported

"how the Left of the Frankfurt Parliament was for a long time undecided who to send to Vienna, Blum or him. Finally, the matter was decided by lot, by drawing a piece of straw, which fell upon Blum, or rather against him" (Die Schillerfeier zu Genf usw., Geneva, 1859, pp. 28, 29).

On October 13 Robert Blum set out from Frankfurt for Vienna. On October 23 or 24 a deputation of the extreme Left in Frankfurt arrived in Cologne on the way to the Democratic Congress in Berlin.71 I met these gentlemen, among whom were several Members of Parliament who had close bonds with the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. These parliamentarians, of whom one was summarily shot during the campaign for the Imperial Constitu- tion, a second died in exile, while the third still lives, whispered all sorts of strange and sinister stories in rnv ear about Vogt's intrigues in connection with Robert*Blums mission to Vienna.

a Wilhelm Wolff. "Erklärung", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 44 (supplement), February 13, 1860. Also published in the Hamburg Reform on February 11, 1860 and in the Berlin Volks-Zeitung on February 2-1, 1850.— Ed.

b Ferdinand von Wcsiphülen. Ed. ' Archibald Campbell Argyli. — Ed.

[^1]: 4*





**[p. 74]**

Bid me not speak, bid me be silent, To keep the secret I am bound.3

The Robert Blum celebrations of November 1859 in Geneva to which we have already referred treated our "well-rounded character" most unkindly. On entering the premises, waddling like an obsequious Silenus at the heels of his patron, James Fazy, a worker was heard to say: There's Harry with Falstaff after him. When he told a delightful anecdote designed to present himself as the alter ego of Robert Blum, it was only with difficulty that some infuriated workers were prevented from storming the podium. And when, finally, forgetting how he had frustrated the revolution in June, he himself "called yet again for the barricades"b

{Schillerfeier, p. 29) a mocking echo repeated: "Barricades— shmarricades!" Abroad, however, people know so well just what value they are to place on Vogt's revolutionary mouthings that the "confidential inquiry from a South German Ambassador",c usually unavoidable, was unforthcoming on this occasion and no article appeared in the Allgemeine Zeitung.

Vogt's entire Stieberiad from the "Brimstone Gang" to the "retired Minister" reveals the sort of Mastersinger of whom Dante says:

Ed egli avea fatto del cul trombetta.*

* And he made a trumpet of his rear. (Kannegiesser) [Dante, The Divine Comedy, Inferno, Canto XXI. Kannegiesser is the name of the German translator.]

a Mignon's song in Goethe's novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre, Fünftes Buch, Kapitel 16.—Ed.

b The closing line of the poem about Robert Blum which Vogt quoted concluding his speech at the Blum celebrations (see Georg Lommel, Die Schiller-Feier in Genf. Nebst einem Nachtrag enthaltend die diesjährige Todtenfeier für Robert Blum, Genf, 1859, S. 29).— Ed.

c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 181-82.—Ed.

