---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "VI. Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "127-158"
---

# VI. Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 102]**

VI

VOGT AND THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

"Sîn kumber was manecvalt."3

Vogt himself claims that his "purpose" in writing his "Magnum Opus" (p. 162) is to clarify "the development of his personal attitude to this clique'" (Marx and Co.)- Curiously enough, he only describes conflicts that he has never experienced and only experiences conflicts that he has never described. So it is necessary to confront his tall stories with a piece of real history. Anyone who leafs through the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (June 1, 1848-May 19, 1849) will discover that in 1848 Vogt's name does not occur, apart from a single exception,"3 either in its leading articles or in its correspondence columns. It will be found only in the daily reports of the parliamentary debates and to Vogt's immense satisfaction the Frankfurt reporterc never failed to record conscientiously the "applause" accorded to him for "the speeches delivered by himself". We saw that whereas the Right wing in Frankfurt had at their disposal the united forces of a harlequin like Lichnowski and a clown like von Vincke, the Left was forced to rely entirely on the sporadic outbreaks of farce from its one and only Vogt. We realised that he stood in need of encouragement,

"that important fellow, the children's wonder—Signor Punchinello",d

a "His griefs were manifold" — an adapted line from Der Edel Stein, a collection of fables by Ulrich Bonerius.— Ed.

b This refers to the article "Ein Aktenstück des Märzvereins" in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, December 29, 1848.— Ed.

[^1]: c Gustav Adolph Schlöffei.— Ed. d Marx gives these lines in English.— Ed.





**[p. 103]**

In the debates on the Truce of Malmö, Vogt tried to stir up a rebellion with his revolutionary rantings.3 At the decisive moment he did his utmost to prevent the acceptance of the resolutions which had been passed by the popular assembly on the Pfingst- weide and approved by a section of the extreme Left.94 After the barricade fighting had been crushed, with Frankfurt openly transformed into an army camp and a state of siege proclaimed, this same Vogt declared on September 19 that he was in favour of urgently discussing Zachariä's resolution endorsing the measures already taken by the Imperial Ministry and expressing gratitude to the Imperial troops.b Before Vogt rose to speak even Venedeyc had protested against the "urgency" of these resolutions, declaring that such a discussion at such a time was unworthy of the Assembly. But Vogt was inferior to Venedey. By way of punishment I inserted the word "windbag" into the parliamentary reportd after the word "Vogt", as a hint to the Frankfurt reporter.

In the following October Vogt not only neglected his duty of waving his harlequin's wooden sword above the heads of the then boisterous and fiercely reactionary majority. He did not even dare to sign the protest tabled by Zimmermann of Spandau6 on October 10 in the name of some 40 deputies, opposing the law for the protection of the National Assembly.95 The law, as Zimmermann correctly pointed out, signalled the most shameless interference with the popular rights that had been gained in the March revolution—right of assembly, freedom of speech and of the press. Even Eisenmann* handed in a similar protest. But Vogt was

inferior to Eisenmann. When he did venture forth again at the founding of the "Central March Association"96 his name finally made its appearance in an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung

b The speeches by Vogt and Zachariä in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 19, 1848, ibid., S. 2188.— Ed.

' Venedey's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 19, 1848, ibid., S. 2187.— Ed.

d Report on the sitting of the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 20, 1848, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 110, September 23, 1848.— Ed.

e Zimmermann's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on October 10, 1848, Stenographischer Bericht, Bd. 4, S. 2531.— Ed.

f Eisenmann's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly, ibid., pp. 2531 et seq.— Ed.

[^1]: a Vogt's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on September 15, 1848, Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden National- versammlung zu Frankfurt am Main,95 Bd. 3, S. 2091-94.— Ed.

[^2]: 5-130.-)





**[p. 104]**

That our assessment of the "March Association" was correct was not only confirmed by its later "development". The Heidelberg "People's League", the Breslau "Democratic Association", the Jena "Democratic Association", etc., all rejected its importunate offers of love with scorn, and those members of the extreme Left who had joined it confirmed our criticism of December 29, 1848, by announcing their resignation on April 20, 1849. Vogt, however, in the quiet grandeur of his soul, heaped coals of fire on our heads as can be seen from the following quotation:

"Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 243, Cologne, March 10, 1849. 'The Frankfurt so-called March Association' of the so-called 'Imperial Assembly' has had the insolence to send us the following lithographed letter:

"'The March Association has decided to compile a list of all newspapers which have given us space in their columns and to distribute it to all associations with which we are connected in order that with the assistance of this association the newspapers indicated will be given preference in being supplied with any relevant announcements. In informing you herewith of this list, we believe it is unnecessary to draw your attention to the importance of the paid announcements of a newspaper as the chief source of income for the whole enterprise. [] Frankfurt, end of February 1849.

The Managing Committee of the Central March Association'

"In the enclosed list of newspapers which have given space in their columns to the March Association and to which the supporters of the March Association should give preference in supplying 'relevant announcements', one finds also the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which, in addition, is given the honour of an asterisk. We hereby announce [] that our newspaper has never given space in its columns to the so-called March Association If, therefore, the March Association in its lithographed report to those newspapers which have really given it space in their columns designates our newspaper as one of its organs, this is simply calumny against the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and absurd boasting on the part of the March Association

"To the dirty remark of the profit-greedy competition-goaded



**[p. 105]**

Shortly after this brusque rejection of the source of income proffered by Vogt and Co. the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was tearfully held up as a model of "true German disunity" at a meeting of the Central Commercial Association.1" At the conclusion of our reply to this Jeremiad (Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 248) Vogt is described as a "provincial academic beer-blusterer and an unsuccessful Imperial Barrot".' True, at that time (March 15), he had not yet compromised himself on the question of the Emperor. But we had made our minds up once and for all about Herr Vogt and could therefore regard his future treason as a foregone conclusion, even before it was clear to Vogt himself.

From then on, incidentally, we abandoned Vogt and Co. to the attentions of the young Schlöffet, who was both brave and intelligent. He had arrived in Frankfurt from Hungary early in March after which he kept us informed of all the storms in the Imperial frog-pond.

Vogt, meanwhile, had sunk so low — he himself had of course done more to bring this about than the Neue Rheinische Zeitung— that even Bassermann could venture to brand him an "apostate and renegade" in the session of April 25, 1849.°

F, Engels, one of the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, was forced to flee because of the part he played in the Elberfeld uprising,9' and 1 myself was driven out of Prussia shortly afterwards, after repeated efforts to silence me through legal proceedings had failed thanks to the jury, and after the Neue

Preussische Zeitung, the organ of the coup d'état Ministry,98 had repeatedly denounced the "Chimborazo insolencee of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, compared to which the Moniteur of 1793

a Karl Marx, "The March Association" (see present edition, Vol. 9, pp. 36-37).— Ed.

b Marx puns on März (March) and Kommerz (commerce).— Ed. c Karl Marx, "The Frankfurt March Association and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 85). The italics were introduced by Marx in Herr Vogt.—Ed.

d Stenographischer Bericht, Bd. 8, S. 6303.— Ed. e The Chimborazo is a peak of the Andes. "Chimborazo insolence" means "monumental insolence".— Ed.

[^1]: 5*





**[p. 106]**

On May 19, 1849 the last number of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (the Red Number) appeared. As long as the Neue Rheinische Zeitung existed, Vogt had endured in silence. If a parliamentarian did lodge a complaint, he did so in all modesty. For example:

"Sir, the sharp criticism in your newspaper is valued by me no less because it observes all parties and all persons with equal strictness" (see No. 219 [supplement]. February 11, 1849. Wesendonck's complaint).b

A week after the demise of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Vogt, operating under the mantle of parliamentary immunity, finally thought he could seize his long-awaited opportunity to convert the "matter" he had accumulated deep in his heart into "energy".99

The position was that one of the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Wilhelm Wolff, had replaced a retired Silesian deputy0 in the Frankfurt Assembly, which was "in the process of dissolution" at the time.100

In order to understand the following scene in the parliamentary session of May 26, 1849, it must be borne in mind that the uprising in Dresden and the local movements in the Rhine Province had already been crushed. The Empire was about to intervene in Baden and the Palatinate, the main Russian army was marching on Hungary and, finally, the Imperial Ministry had simply quashed resolutions approved by the Assembly. On the agenda were two "Proclamations to the German Nation", the first edited by Uhland and emanating from the majority, the other stemming from the Committee of Thirty,101 whose members belonged to the Centre. Presiding over the Assembly was Reh from Darmstadt who later turned into a rabbitd and "detached" himself from the Assembly, which was "in complete disarray". I quote from the official stenographic report, Nos. 229, 228. Session in St. Paul's Church.e

Wolff from Breslau: "Gentlemen, I have registered my opposition to the Proclamation to the Nation, the proclamation that was composed by the majority

a Karl Marx, "The Kreuz-Zeitung" (see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 437).— Ed.

b Hugo Wesendonck, "Erklärung. Düsseldorf, 8. Februar 1849".— Ed. c Gustav Adolf Stenzel.— Ed. d Marx plays on the surname Reh, a homonym of Reh (roe deer).— Ed. e Stenographischer Bericht, Bd. 9, S. 6749.— Ed.



**[p. 107]**

President: "I think that Herr Wolff has ignored and offended against every propriety. He cannot describe the Archducal Imperial Regent as a traitor to the people in this House and I must therefore call him to order. I must also request the galleries for the last time not to intervene further in the debate."

Wolff: "For my part, I accept the call to order and declare that it was my intention to transgress the bounds of order and to state that he and his Ministers are traitors." (From all sides of the House: "Order. This is scandalous.")

President: "I must ask you to be seated."

Wolff: "Very well, / protest. I wanted to speak here in the name of the people and to say what the people is thinking. I protest against every proclamation framed in these terms." (Great tumult.)

President: "Gentlemen, will you please allow me to speak for a moment. Gentlemen, the incident that has just taken place is, I may say, the first there has been since Parliament has been in session here." (It was indeed the first and the only incident to take place in that Debating Society.) "No speaker has ever before declared that it was his intention to disrupt the order, the very foundations of this House." (Schlöffel had replied to a similar call to order, in the session of April 25: "I accept the call to order, all the more as I hope that the time will soon come when this Assembly will be called to order in a very different way.")h

"Gentlemen, I deeply regret that Herr Wolff, who has only just become a member of this House, should have made his début in this manner" (Reh looks at the matter from a theatrical point of view). "Gentlemen, I have called him to order because he has permitted himself greatly to affront the respect and consideration that we owe to the person of the Imperial Regent."

3 Archduke John.— Ed. b Stenographischer Bericht, Bd. 8, S. 6751.— Ed.



**[p. 108]**

Vogt from dessen rose from his seat: "Gentlemen, allow me a few words, I shall not weary you. It is perfectly true that this Parliament is no longer what it was when it assembled last year, gentlemen, and we thank Heaven" (our Vogt of "blind faith" a

thanks Heaven) "that it is become so" (is become, indeed! b) "and that those who lost faith in the people and who betrayed the cause of the people at the decisive moment, have now left this Assembly! Gentlemen, I have asked permission to speak" (so the thanksgiving we have just heard was just humbug), "in order to defend the crystal-clear stream" (defence of a stream) "that flowed from the poet's soul" (Vogt is becoming soulful) "into this proclamation against the unworthy filth that has been thrown into it or hurled at it" (but the stream had already been absorbed by the proclamation), "to defend these words" (as with everything that Vogt touches, the stream has been changed into words) "against the muck that has been heaped up in this latest movement and which threatens to engulf and besmirch everything. Yes, gentlemen! That" (namely the muck) "is muck and filth" (the muck is filth!) "which is being thrown in this way" (in what way?) "at everything pure that can be imagined, and I wish to express my deep indignation" (Vogt in deep indignation, quel tableau's) "at the fact that this sort of thing" (what sort of thing?) "could have happened." d

And his very speech is—muck.e

Wolff had not said a single word about Uhland's editing of the proclamation. As the President repeatedly declared, he had been called to order, he had conjured up the whole storm, because he had declared that the Imperial Regent and all his Ministers were traitors to the people and had called on Parliament to do likewise. But for Vogt the "Archducal Imperial Regent", the "worn-out Habsburg" (Vogt's Studien, p. 28) and "all his Ministers" represent "everything pure that can be imagined". With Walther von der Vogelweide he sang:

"des fürsten milte ûz ôsterrîche

a Vogt of "blind faith" (der "Köhlergläubige" Vogt) — an ironical allusion to Vogt's book Köhlerglaube und Wissenschaft, Giessen, 1855.— Ed.

b Marx ridicules the ungrammatical verb form used by Vogt: geworden wird.—Ed.

c What a sight! — Ed. d Stenographischer Bericht, Bd. 9, S. 6751.—Ed. e Variation on a verse from Ludwig Uhland's "Des Sängers Fluch": "Und was er spricht, ist Geissei" ("His very speech is a whiplash").— Ed.

1 "The Prince of Austria's generosity, Like gentle rain, bestows felicity Both on the people and on the land."—Ed.

[^1]: fröit dem süezen rëgen gelîche beidiu Hute und ouch daz lant."f





**[p. 109]**

Ten years later the same Vogt declared in the Studien (pp. 27[-28]):

"So much a! least is certain: the National Assembly in France and its leaders at the time underestimated the abilities of Louis Napoleon jusi as the leaders of the Frankfurt National Assembly underestimated those of Archduke John, and both the old foxes made their respective detractors t>a\ deari\ for their mistake. We are far from wanting to equate the two men, The terrible ruthlessness, etc.. etc." (of Louis Bonaparte).— All this makes him cut a tar superior figure to the old and worn-out Habsburg." a

During the very same session Wolfj challenged Vogt to a duel with pistols—a challenge which was transmitted by deputy Würth from Sigmaringen—and when the aforesaid Vogt preferred to preserve his skin intact for the Empire,* he threatened to thrash him. On leaving St. Paul's Church, however, Wolff discovered Charles the Bold flanked by two ladies, and bursting into laughter he left him to his fate. Although he is a wolf, with a wolf's heart and teeth, Wolff is a lamb when he sees the fair sex. His only, really quite innocuous, revenge was an article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue (April issue, 1850, p. 73) entitled "Nachträgliches aus dem Reich''' in which he wrote about the Ex-Imperial Regent as follows:

"In these critical days the Central March people have been extremely industrious. Before withdrawing from Frankfurt they had published an address to the various March associations and to the German people: 'Fellow-citizens! The eleventh hour has struck!' In order to assemble a people's army they issued a new proclamation'to the German nation' from Stuttgart, and lo and behold! the hand on the Central March clock had stood still, or like the clock on Freiburg Minster, had lost the number XII. However that might be, this proclamation too began with the words: 'Fellow-citizens! The eleventh hour has struck!' Oh if only it had struck earlier, and had pierced your heads, at least at the time when Karl Vogt, the Central March hero, was pacifying the Franconian revolution 102 in Nuremberg to his own satisfaction and to the satisfaction of the wailers who were feting him**

* In the pamphlet by Jacobus Venedey already referred to, Kobes I tells the following story: "In the same session in which Gagern embraced Gabriel Riesser after the latter's speech on the Emperor, Karl Vogt embraced Zimmermann in St. Paul's Church with mock pathos and noisy exclamations, and so I called out to him: 'Stop these roguish pranks.' Vogt thought it expedient to reply in provocative and abusive terms and when I challenged him personally, he had the courage, after a friend had made a number of journeys between the two of us, to withdraw his insult" (loc. cit., pp. 21, 22).

** Vogt later justified his valiant deeds in Nuremberg with the words: "He had been given no guarantees for his own personal safety."

3 Carl Vogt, Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, S. 27-28. Marx's italics.— Ed.



**[p. 110]**

Karl Vogt, who was also Foreign Minister and the incumbent of many other Ministries, once more took the well-being of the German people3 very much to heart. Having studied their problems in long days and nights he came up with a very timely invention, that of 'Imperial Regency passports'. These passports were simple, beautifully lithographed and could be obtained gratis by anyone whose heart desired one. They only had the one small defect of being recognised as valid only in Vogt's Chancellery. It is possible that later on one or other of them will find its way into an Englishman's collection of curios." b

Wolff did not follow Greiner's example. Instead of "departing at once for America" as soon as the Revue "had appeared", he remained for a year in Switzerland, awaiting the revenge of the Land-Vogt.

a Wolff has: "of the German Empire".— Ed. b Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, IV. Heft, April 1850, S. 75, 76.— Ed.

VII

THE AUGSBURG CAMPAIGN

Shortly after the citizen of the Canton of Thurgau103 had concluded his Italian war, the citizen of the Canton of Bernea

launched his Augsburg campaign.

"There" (in London) "it was the Marx clique that had always supplied the greater part of the reports" (of the Allgemeine Zeitung), "and ever since 1849 its relations with the 'Allgemeine Zeitung' had been continuous" ("Magnum Opus", p. 194)>

Although Marx has only been living in London since the end of 1849,c i.e. since he was expelled from France for the second time, the "Marx clique" appears to have lived in London always, and although the Marx clique has "always supplied the greater part of the reports of the Allgemeine Zeitung", "its relations" with the Allgemeine Zeitung have only been "continuous ever since 1849". At all events, Vogt's chronology is divided—and this is not to be wondered at since before 1848 the man "had not yet contem- plated any political activity" (loc. cit., p. 225)—into two great periods, viz., the period "always" up to 1849, and the period from 1849 up to "this" year.

Between 1842 and 1843 I edited the old Rheinische Zeitung, which waged a life-and-death war with the Allgemeine Zeitung.

From 1848 to 1849 the Neue Rheinische Zeitung revived the polemic. What remains, then, of the period "always up to 1849"

a i.e. Vogt. See his Studien zur gegenwärtigen Lage Europas, S. 6.— Ed. h Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 194. The words "the Marx clique" were italicised by Vogt, the rest of the italics are Marx's.— Ed.

[^1]: c Marx arrived in London about August 26, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 112]**

Now for the second period of world history à la Vogt. The reason why I maintained "continuous relations with the Allgemeine Zeitung" from London, "continuous ever since 1849", is that "from 1852" a certain Ohly had been chief London correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung. It is true that Ohly had no relations whatever with me, either before or after 1852. I have never seen him in my life. Inasmuch as he played any part among the London refugees it was as a member of Kinkel's Emigration Association. But this has no bearing on the case, for,

"The former oracle of Altenhöfer, that old Bavarian who had learnt English, was my" (Vogt's) "fellow-countryman, the blond Ohly, who having started out as a communist, strove to attain a loftier poetic standpoint in politics and literature. At first in Zurich, but from 1852 in London, he was the chief correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung until he ended his days in a madhouse." ("Magnum Opus", p. 195.)

Edouard Simon, the police spy, has Frenchified this Vogtiad as follows:

"En voici d'abord un qui de son point de départ communiste, avait cherché à s'élever aux plus hautes conceptions de la politique." ("Loftier poetic standpoint in politics" was beyond the genius even of an Edouard Simon.) "A en croire M. Vogt, cet adepte fut l'oracle de la Gazette d'Augsbourg jusqu'en 1852, époque où il mourut dans une maison de fous"3 (Revue contemporaine, Vol. XIII, Paris, 1860, p. 529).

"Operam et oleum perdidi,"b Vogt may well say of his "Magnum Opus" and his Ohly. Whereas he makes his "fellow- countryman" the London correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung from 1852, until he "ends his days in a madhouse", Edouard Simon says that "if we may believe Vogt, Ohly had been the oracle of the Allgemeine Zeitung up to 1852 when he" (who, it will be noted, is still alive) "died in a madhouse". But Edouard Simon knows his Karl Vogt. Edouard knows that once one has resolved to "believe" Karl, it is quite irrelevant what one believes, whether it is what he says, or the opposite of what he says.

" Herr Liebknecht," says Karl Vogt, "replaced him" (namely Ohly) "as correspond- ent of the Allgemeine Zeitung." "Only after Liebknecht had been openly proclaimed

a "This is a man who, having started out as a communist, strove to raise himself to the loftier conceptions of politics. If we may believe Herr Vogt, this adept was the oracle of the Augsburg Gazette up to 1852 when he died in a madhouse."—Ed.

b "I have wasted oil and labour", Plautus, Poenulus, Act I, Scene 2, where it is spoken by a whore whose efforts to repair the ravages of time have proved vain. Oleum is a pun on Ohly.— Ed.



**[p. 113]**

That proclamation was made during the Cologne communist trial, i.e. at the end of 1852.

In fact in the spring of 1851 Liebknecht became a contributor to the Morgenblatt where he reported on the Great Exhibition in London.104 Through the mediation of the Morgenblatt he was made correspondent of the Allgemeine Zeitung in September 1855.

"His" (Marx's) "comrades do not write a single line of which Marx has not been previously informed" (loc. cit., p. 194).

The proof is simple: "He" (Marx) "has absolute control over his people" (p. 195) whereas Vogt is absolutely obedient to his Fazy and Co. We are confronted here by a peculiarity of Vogt's myth-making. The pygmy standards of Giessen or Geneva, the small-town framework and the fug of Swiss taverns are everywhere. Naively translating the leisurely provincial cliquism of Geneva to one of the great cities of the world, London, he will not allow Liebknecht to write "a single line" in the West End of which I "have not been previously informed" four miles away in Hampstead. And I perform the identical services of a La Guéronnièreb every day for a whole host of "comrades" scattered all over London and writing their reports to the four corners of the globe. A delightful profession—and a profitable one!

With the unmistakable delicacy of the artist, Vogt's mentor, Edouard Simon, who does not know London, but is at least familiar with conditions in Paris, provides the account of his uncouth "friend from the country" with the veneer of the big city:

"Marx, comme chef de la société, ne tient pas lui-même la plume, mais ses fidèles n'écrivent pas une ligne sans l'avoir consulté: La Gazette d'Augsbourg sera d'autant mieux servie" (loc. cit., p. 529). That is to say, "Marx as head of the society does not write himself, but his trusted associates do not write a single line without first consulting him. In this way the Augsburger Zeitung is the better served."

Does Vogt appreciate all the subtlety of this correction? I had as much to do with Liebknecht's reports to the Allgemeine Zeitung from London as I had with Vogt's reports to the Allgemeine Zeitung from Paris. Moreover, Liebknecht's reports were praiseworthy in every respect—a critical presentation of English politics, which he described in exactly the same way in the

[^1]: a Vogt has: "of Marx's society".— Ed. b La Guéronnière was Chief Censor during the Second Empire in France.— Ed.





**[p. 114]**

The fact that the lines were on a slant showed of course that the reports themselves were not quite straight. But even worse, they were "thin"\ If only Liebknecht had chosen instead of two "thin lines", two round blobs of grease for his reports! But even if there is nothing reprehensible about his reports apart from these "two thin slanting lines", there is still the objection that they were printed at all in the Allgemeine Zeitung. And why should they not? It is a known fact that the Allgemeine Zeitung allows the most widely divergent views to be expressed in its columns, at least on such neutral topics as that of English politics, and in addition it is the only German paper with a more than local significance in the eyes of the world. Liebknecht could without hesitation dispatch his London letters to the very newspaper for which Heine wrote his "Paris Letters" and Fallmerayer his "Oriental Letters".105 Vogt reports that lewd persons also wrote for the Allgemeine Zeitung. It is well known that he himself was a contributor from 1844 to 1847.

As far as Frederick Engels and myself are concerned—I mention Engels because we work to a common plan and after prior agreement—it is true that in 1859 we did enter into a "relationship" of a sort with the Allgemeine Zeitung. That is to say during January, February and March 1859 I published a series of leading articles in the New-York Tribune in which inter alia the theory advanced by the Allgemeine Zeitung about a "Central European great power" and that paper's claim that it was in the Germans' interest to maintain Austria's rule in Italy were subjected to searching criticism. Shortly before the outbreak of war, and with my agreement, Engels published Po and Rhine, Berlin, 1859,aa pamphlet directed specifically against the Allgemeine Zeitung. To quote Engels' own words (from his pamphlet Savoy, Nice and the Rhine, Berlin, 1860, p. 4) it provided scientific military proof that "Germany does not need any part of Italy for its defence and that

a Karl Marx, "The War Prospect in Prussia", and Frederick Engels, Po and Rhine (see present edition, Vol. 16).— Ed.



**[p. 115]**

Ever since Wolff's article in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Revue (1850),' I had completely forgotten the "well-rounded character". I was reminded of the merry fellow once more in the spring of 1859, on an evening in April, when Freiligrath gave me a letter of Vogt's to read together with an accompanying political " Pro- gramme" .,07 This was no act of indiscretion since Vogt's circular was intended "for communication" to the friends not of Vogt, but of the addressee.

Asked what I found in the "Programme", I replied: "Political hot air." I could see at once that the old joker had not changed, from his request to Freiligrath to persuade Herr Bucher to become political correspondent for the propaganda sheet to be published in Geneva.d Vogt's letter was dated April 1, 1859. It was well known that in the reports he sent from London to the Berlin National-Zeitung since January 1859, Bücher advocated views directly antithetical to those in Vogt's Programme. But all cats are grey to the man of "critical immediacy".

After this incident which I did not think of sufficient impor- tance to mention to anyone, I received a copy of Vogt's Studien

a See present edition, Vol. 16, p. 572.— Ed. h See "The Money Panic in F.urope", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5548, February 1, 1859 (present edition, Vol. 16).— Ed.

c Wilhelm Wolff, "Nachträgliches aus dem Reich", Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, Heft 4, April 1850.— Ed.

d Presumably Die Neue Schweiz.— Ed.



**[p. 116]**

On the evening of May 9, 1859 1 found mvself on the platform at a public meeting arranged by Da\id Urquhart because of the Italian war. Before the meeting had got under way I saw a solemn figure approaching me portentoush. From the Hamlet-like expression on his countenance I realised at once that "something was rotten in the state of Denmark".' It was the homme d'état, Karl

Blind. After a few preliminaries he began to talk about Vogt's "intrigues" and he assured me with much shaking of the head that Vogt was in receipt of Bonapartist subsidies for his propaganda, that a South German writer, whose name he could "unfortunately" not reveal, had been offered 30,000 guilders as a bribe by Vogt—I was in some doubt as to which South German writer could possibly be worth 30,000 guilders—that there had been attempts at bribery in London, that as early as 1858 there had been a meeting between Plön-PI on. Fazy He Co. in Geneva where the Italian war had been discussed and the Grand Duke Constantine of Russia had been named as the future King of Hungary, that Vogt had also tried to enlist him (Blind) for his propaganda, and that he had proofs of Vogts treasonable intrigues against his country. Blind then withdrew to his seat at the other corner of the platform next to his friend J. Fröbel; the meeting began and in a detailed reportb D. Urquhart tried to present the Italian war as the fruit of Franco-Russian intrigue.*

* Vogt naturally connects the attacks on Lord Pahnerston by the Marx clique with my hostility to this self-important personage and his "friends" ("Magnum Opus", p. 212). It would appear, then, that this is a suitable place to comment briefly on my relations with D. Urquhart and his party. Urquhart's writings on Russia and against Palmerston had interested but not convinced me. In order to arrive at a firm view I undertook the laborious analysis of Hansard's Parliamentary Debates and the diplomatic Blue Books from 1807 to 1850. The first fruits of these studies were a series of leading articles in the New-York Tribune (end of 1853) in which I demonstrated Palmerston's involvement with the St. Petersburg Cabinet on the basis of his transactions with Poland, Turkey, Circassia, etc. Shortly afterwards I had these articles reprinted in The People's Paper, the organ of the Chartists edited by Ernest Jones, together with additional passages about Palmerston's activities.108

In the meantime, The Glasgow Sentinel had also reprinted one of the articles ("Palmerston and Poland") which attracted the attention of Mr. D. Urquhart. After a meeting with me he persuaded Mr. Tucker in London to bring out some of

a Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, Scene 4.— Ed. b David Urquhart's report was discussed in the article "Mr. Urquhart's Address on Neutrality" in The Free Press, No. 5, May 27, 1859.— Ed.



**[p. 117]**

Although Biscamp had been living in England since 1852, we had not yet made each other's acquaintance. The day after the Urquhart meeting Liebknecht brought him to my home. From lack of time I could not accept the invitation to write for Das Volk for the moment, but I promised to ask my German friends in

the articles in pamphlet form. These Palmerston pamphlets were later sold in various editions in numbers ranging from 15,000 to 20,000. Following my analysis of the Blue Book on the fall of Kars—it was published in the London organ of the Chartists in April 1856a—I received a letter of thanks from the Sheffield Foreign Affairs Committee.109 (See Appendix 7.) While looking through the diplomatic manuscripts in the possession of the British Museum I came across a series of English documents, going back from the end of the eighteenth century to the time of Peter the Great, which reveal the continuous secret collaboration between the Cabinets of London and St. Petersburg, and seem to indicate that this relationship arose at the time of Peter the Great. Up to now, all I have published of a detailed investigation into the subject has been an introduction with the title Revelations of the Diplomatic History of the 18th Century. This appeared first in the Sheffield and subsequently in the London Free Press,110 both published by Urquhart. The last-named has received occasional contributions from me since its foundation. My interest in Palmerston and British-Russian diplomatic relations in general arose, as one can see, without my having had the slightest suspicion that the figure of Herr Karl Vogt was standing behind that of Lord Palmerston.

a "The Fall of Kars", The People's Paper, Nos. 205-08, April 5, 12, 19 and 26 (see present edition, Vol. 14).— Ed.

[^1]: b Marx uses the English term.— Ed.





**[p. 118]**

Hornisse, which he had edited in Cassel with Heise in 1848-49. In the meantime, as I learned long after the appearance of the "Magnum Opus" (see Appendix 8), the London Workers' Educational Society had commissioned Herr Scherzer, one of its leaders, to invite the workers' educational associations in Switzer- land, Belgium and the United States to support Das Volk and to combat Bonapartist propaganda. Biscamp himself sent a copy of the above-mentioned article published in Das Volk on May 14, 1859 to Vogt, who simultaneously received Herr A. Scherzer's circular from his own Ranickel.

With his familiar "critical immediacy" Vogt at once cast me in the role of the demiurge behind these attempts to ensnare him. Without hesitation he at once published an outline of his later travesty of history b in the oft-quoted "special supplement to No. 150 of the 'Schweizer Handels-Courier'". This original gospel which first revealed the mysteries of the Brimstone Gang, the Bristlers, Cherval, etc., beneath the date Berne, May 23, 1859 (and hence more recently than the gospel according to the Mormons112), bore the title Zur Warnung0 and its content corresponds to that of a piece translated from a pamphlet113 by the notorious E. About.*

* A word about the Biel Commis voyageur, the local Moniteur of the "fugitive Imperial Regent". The publisher and editor of the Biel Handels-Courier is a

a This refers to the anonymous article "Der Reichsregent". One of the paragraphs in it begins with the words "Der Reichsregent als Reichsverräther!"—Ed.

b See Johann Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengfh^urliche Geschichtklitterung— Ed.

c Carl Vogt, "Zur Warnung", Schweizer Handds-Courier, No. 150 (special supplement), June 2, 1859; see also Mein Prozess, Dokumente, S. 31-33.— Ed.



**[p. 119]**

In the beginning of June I left London to visit Engels in Manchester, where a subscription of about £25 was collected for

Das Volk. This contribution, whose "nature" induced the "curi- ous" Vogt to cast his "eyes across the Channel" towards Augsburg and Vienna ("Magnum Opus", p. 212), came from Frederick Engels, Wilhelm Wolff, myself and finally three German physiciansb resident in Manchester, whose names are recorded in one of the legal documents I sent to Berlin. As to the money collected in London by the original Finance Committee, Vogt should consult Dr. Faucher.

Vogt informs us on p. 225 of the "Magnum Opus":

"But it has always been a device of the reactionaries to require the democrats to do everything for nothing while they" (that is the reactionaries, not the democrats) "claim the right to demand payment and to be paid."

What a reactionary device on the part of Das Volk, which is not only edited and written for nothing but even induces those who work on it to payl If that is not proof of the connection between

Das Volk and the reaction, then Karl Vogt is at his wit's end.

During my stay in Manchester an event of decisive importance took place in London. Liebknecht discovered in the compositor's room of Hollinger (who printed "Das Volk") the proof-sheet of the anonymous pamphlet against Vogt entitled Zur Warnung. He read it through cursorily, immediately recognised Blind's revelations and to crown it all learnt from A. Vögele, the compositor, that Blind had given the manuscript, which was in his handwriting, to Hollinger for printing. The corrections on the proof-sheet were also in Blind's handwriting. Two days later Hollinger sent Liebknecht the proof-sheet, which he in turn sent to the Allgemeine Zeitung. The type for the pamphlet survived and was used later for a reprint in Das Volk, No. 7 (June 18, 1859).'

With the publication of the "warning" by the Allgemeine Zeitung'*

certain Ernst Schüler, a political refugee of 1838, a postmaster, wine merchant, bankrupt and at present solvent once more thanks to the fact that his newspaper, which was subsidised by British, French and Swiss advertisements during the Crimean war, now numbers 1,200 subscribers.

a No. 6, June 11, 1859.— Ed. h l.ouis Borchardt, Eduard Gumpets and Martin He« ksc her.-- Ed. r In the article "Warnung zur gefälligen Verbreitung".— Ed. ^ "K. Vogt und die deutsche Emigration in London", All gern eine Zritvug, No. 17."., June 22, 1859.— Ed.



**[p. 120]**

In the "Magnum Opus" (pp. 227-28) Vogt travesties Milliner's " 'Tis me, 'tis me; I am the robber Jaromir".114 He merely translates "to be" into "to have".

"J have sued because I knew all along that the shallowness, futility and baseness of the editorial board which parades as the 'representative of High German culture', would be forced into the open. / have sued because I knew all along that the connection of its esteemed editors and the Austrian policies they have been exalting to the heavens with the Brimstone Gang and the dregs of the revolution, could not remain hidden from the public."

And so on through another four "J have sued's". The suing Vogt becomes quite sublime,a or Longinus is right when he says that there is nothing in the world that is drier than a man with dropsy.b

"Personal considerations," the "well-rounded character" declares, "were the least of my motives when I went for the law."

In reality matters stood quite differently. No calf could show greater reluctance to go to the slaughter than Karl Vogt to go to court. While his "close" friends, the Ranickel, Reinach (formerly a peripatetic chronique scandaleuse about Vogt) and the garrulous Mayer from Esslingen, a member of the Rump Parliament, confirmed him in his terror of the court, he was bombarded with urgent requests from Zurich to proceed with his "suit". At the Workers' Festival in Lausanne the fur-dealer Roos told him in front of witnesses that he could no longer have any respect for him if he did not take legal proceedings. Nevertheless, Vogt resisted: He did not give a rap for the Augsburg and London Brimstone Gang and would remain silent. Suddenly, however, he spoke. Various newspapers announced the forthcoming trial and the Ranickel declared:

"The Stuttgart people would not leave him" (Vogt) "any peace. He" (Ranickel) "had not given his approval."

We may note in passing that since the "well-rounded one" found himself in a tight corner, an action against the Allgemeine Zeitung was undoubtedly the most promising stratagem. Vogt's self-apologia in response to an attack on him by J. Venedey, who had accused him of Bonapartist intrigues,115 saw the light in the

a A pun in the original: der geklagt habende (who has sued) and wird erhaben (becomes sublime).— Ed.

b Cassius Longinus, Chi the Sublime.—Ed.



**[p. 121]**

"11. however, Vogt attempts to deny these accusations, a thing he will hardly dart, this revelation will be followed by No. 2.*'

Vogt had now issued a denial and revelation No. 2 did not follow. Secure on this front, mischief could only come from his dear friends, whom he knew well enough to rely on their cowardice. The more he exposed himself in public by resorting to legal action, the more surely he could bank on their discretion, for in the person of the "fugitive Imperial Regent" it was in a way the entire Rump Parliament that was standing in the pillory.

Parliamentarian Jacob Venedey tells tales out of school in his Pro domo und pro patria gegen Karl Vogt, Hanover, 1860, pp. 27-28:

'Apart from the letters produced by Vogt in his own account of his lawsuit, I have read a further letter of Vogts which reveals, much more clearly than the letter to Dr. Loening.' Vogt's position as the accomplice of those who were making strenuous efforts to localise the war in Italy. I have copied out a few passages from this letter for my own information, but unfortunately 1 cannot publish them because the man to whom the letter was addressed only showed them to me on condition that I would not publish them, Attempts have been made from personal and party considerations to cover up Vogt's part in this affair which in my view cannot be justified either from a party point of view or in terms of a man's duty to his country. This restraint on the part of many people explains why Vogt can still have the temerity to present himself as a German part) leader 77 appears to me, however, that the party to which Vogt belonged has by this means become in part responsible for his activities." *

If then his action against the Allgemeine Zeitung was not risking all that much, an offensive in that direction provided General Vogt with the most favourable base of operations. It was Austria that was denigrating the Imperial Vogt through the Allgemeine Zeitung, and moreover, Austria in league with the communists! Thus the Imperial Vogt appeared as the interesting victim of a

* See also p. 4 of the same pamphlet where it is stated: "This practice of 'making allowances' from party considerations, the want of moral principle implied in admitting among themselves that Vogt has been playing a disgraceful game with his own country [] and then permitting Vogt to sue people for slander when they have only asserted what all know and think and of which they know and even possess the proofs—all this I find quite nauseating, etc."

a Carl Vogt, "Erklärung", Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 162 (special supple- ment). Vogt's statement was dated Geneva, June 10, 1859. He also included it in his

Mein Prozess, Dokumente, S. 20-25.— Ed.

b "Warnung zur gefälligen Verbreitung", Das Volk, No. 7, June 18, 1859.— Ed. c Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, Dokumente, S. 36.— Ed.



**[p. 122]**

In the beginning of July 1859, shortly after my return from Manchester, Blind paid me a visit in consequence of an incident of no importance in this context. He was accompanied by Fidelio Hollinger and Liebknecht. During this meeting I gave it as my opinion that Blind was the author of the pamphlet Zur Warnung. He protested the opposite. I repeated what he had told me on May 9a point by point, for in fact his assertions then constituted the entire contents of the pamphlet. He admitted all that but nevertheless insisted that he was not the author of the pamphlet.

About a month later, in August 1859, Liebknecht showed me a letter he had received from the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung who urgently asked him for proof of the allegations made in the pamphlet Zur Warnung. At his request I agreed to go with him to Blind's home in St. John's Wood, for even if Blind was not the author, he at any rate had known as early as the beginning of May what the pamphlet did not reveal to the world until the beginning of June, and he could, moreover, "prove" what he knew. Blind was not there. He had gone to a seaside resort. Liebknecht, therefore, wrote to him explaining the purpose of our visit. No answer. Liebknecht wrote to him a second time.117 Finally, the following statesman-like document arrived:

"Dear Herr Liebknecht,

"Your two letters, which had been wrongly addressed, arrived almost simultaneously. As you will understand I have absolutely no wish to meddle in the affairs of a newspaper with which I am quite unconnected. All the less in the given case, since, as I have already stated, I had nothing whatever to do with the problem in question. As to the remarks you cite that were made in the course of a private conversation, it is obvious that these were completely misinterpreted. There is evidently a misunderstanding here which I shall discuss with you in due course. I am sorry that your visit to me with Marx was in vain and

"I remain, respectfully yours,

K. Blind

"St. Leonard's, September 8"

This cool diplomatic note according to which Blind had "nothing whatever to do" with the denunciation of Vogt, reminded me of an article which had appeared anonymously in

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 116.— Ed.





**[p. 123]**

<é "The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary "A Correspondent, who encloses his card, writes as follows:— "Sir,— Having been present at the last meeting* in the Music Hall, I heard the statement made concerning the Grand Duke Constantine. I am able to give you another fact: So far back as last summer, Prince Jérôme-Napoléon detailed to some of his confidants at Geneva a plan of attack against Austria, and prospective rearrangement of the map of Europe. I know the name of a Swiss senator to whom he broached the subject. Prince Jérôme, at that time, declared that, according to the plan made, Grand Duke Constantine was to become King of Hungary.

"I know further of attempts made, in the beginning of the present year, to min over to the Russo-Napoleonic scheme some of the exiled German Democrats, as well as some influential Liberals in Germany. Large pecuniary advantages were held out to them as a bribe P I am glad to say that these offers were rejected with indignation." (See Appendix 9.)

This article—though it does not name Vogt but, as far as the German emigration in London was concerned, unmistakably points to him—does in effect contain the core of the pamphlet Zur Warnung that appeared later on. The author of the "future King of Hungary", whom patriotic zeal drove to make an anonymous denunciation of Vogt, had of course to grasp the golden opportunity that the Augsburg trial had thrown into his lap, the opportunity to reveal the treachery in a court of law in full view of the whole of Europe. And who was the author of the "future King of Hungary"? Citizen Karl Blind. The form and content of the article had already made that obvious to me in May and this was now officially confirmed by Mr. Collet, the editor of The Free Press, after I had explained to him the importance of the dispute that was pending and after I had shown him Blind's diplomatic note.

On September 17, 1859, Herr A. Vögele, the compositor, gave me a written declaration (printed in the "Magnum Opus", Documents, Nos. 30, 31), in which he testifies not that Blind was the author of the pamphlet Zur Warnung, but that he (A. Vögele) and his employer, Fidelio Hollinger, had set the type for it in the Hollinger print-shop, that the manuscript was in Blind's hand and that Blind had occasionally been mentioned by Hollinger as the author of the pamphlet.

* This was the meeting held by D. Urquhart on May 9, mentioned above.

a In the German original the letter is given in Marx's translation. In the present edition the original English text is given, which Marx supplies in Appendix 9.— Ed.

b Marx quotes this sentence in English in brackets after the German translation. The italics in this paragraph are Marx's.— Ed.



**[p. 124]**

In the meantime, the date set down for the hearing of the case in Augsburg was drawing nearer. Blind remained silent. Vogt had attempted in various public announcements to make me as the secret source of it all responsible both for the pamphlet and the proof of the facts given in it. To ward off this manoeuvre, to vindicate Liebknecht and to defend the Allgemeine Zeitung, which in my view had performed a good deed in denouncing Vogt, I informed the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung via Liebknecht that I was prepared to let them have a document regarding the origin of the pamphlet Zur Warnung, if I received a written request from them. That is how the "lively correspondence came about which is at present carried on by Marx and Herr Kolb" as Herr Vogt states on p. 194 of the "Magnum Opus".* My "lively correspondence with Herr

Kolb" consisted in two letters from Herr Orges to me, both of the same date, in which he asked me for the document I had promised, which I then sent him together with a few lines from myself.**

The two letters from Herr Orges, which were in reality just a double edition of the same letter, arrived in London on October 18, 1859, while the court proceedings were due to begin in Augsburg on the 24th. I therefore wrote at once to Herr Vögele to arrange a meeting next day in the office at the Marlborough Street Police Court, where he should give his declaration about the pamphlet Zur Warnung the legal form of an affidavit.*** My letter

* It is true that in No. 319 of the Allgemeine Zeitung, Herr Kolb mentions "a very detailed letter from Herr Marx which he has not printed". But this "detailed letter" has been printed in the Hamburg Reform, No. 139, supplement of November 19, 1859. The "detailed letter" was a declaration from me intended for publication, and I sent it also to the Berlin Volks-Zeitung. [See this volume, pp. 4-7.]

** My covering note [see this volume, p. 3] and Vögele's declaration can be found in the "Magnum Opus", Documents, pp. 30, 31. Herr Orges' letters to me are contained in Appendix 10.

*** An affidavit is a statutory declaration given before a court, which, if false, is liable to all the penalties incurred by perjury.



**[p. 125]**

The court proceedings in Augsburg, as is well known, turned into a true comedy of errors. The corpus delicti was the pamphlet

Zur Warnung sent by W. Liebknecht to the Allgemeine Zeitung and reprinted by it. The publisher and the author of the pamphlet, however, were involved in a game of blind-man's buff. Liebknecht could not compel his witnesses, who were in London, to appear before the court in Augsburg; the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung, embarrassed by this legal impasse, spouted a lot of political gibberish; Dr. Hermann regaled the court with the tall stories of our "well-rounded character" about the Brimstone Gang, the Lausanne Festival, etc.; and the court finally dismissed Vogt's suit because the plaintiff had brought the case to the wrong court. The confusion reached its climax when the case in Augsburg had been concluded and the report on the proceedings3

reached London with the Allgemeine Zeitung. Blind, who had unswervingly preserved his statesman-like silence up to that moment, suddenly leaped into the public arena scared by the testimony of Vögele, the compositor, which had been produced by me. Vögele had not declared that Blind was the author of the pamphlet, but only that he had been referred to as such by Fidelio Hollinger. However, Vögele did declare categorically that the manuscript of the pamphlet had been written in Blind's hand, with which he was familiar, and that it had been set and printed in Hollinger's print-shop. Blind could be the author of the pamphlet even if it had neither been written down in Blind's handwriting, nor set up and printed in Hollinger's print-shop. Conversely, the pamphlet could have been written down by Blind and printed by Hollinger, even though Blind was not the author.

In No. 313 of the Allgemeine Zeitung, beneath the date London,

* Since I write illegibly my letter of October 19 was regarded by the Augsburg Court as dated October 29. Vogt's lawyer, Dr. Hermann, Vogt himself, the dignified Berlin "National-Zeitung" et hoc genus omne [and that whole tribe] of "critical immediacy" did not doubt at all that a letter written in London on October 29 could arrive in Augsburg by October 24.

** That this quid pro quo was the result of pure chance — namely the belated arrival of my letter to Vögele—can be seen from his subsequent affidavit of February 11, 1860.

a The report in question, "Prozess Vogt gegen die Redaction der Allgemeinen Zeitung", was published in the Allgemeine Zeitung, Nos. 300 and 301, October 27 and 28, 1859.— Ed.



**[p. 126]**

"a) 1 hereby declare that the assertion of the compositor Vögele printed in the Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300, to the effect that the pamphlet Zur Warnung mentioned there was printed in my print-shop or that Herr Karl Blind was its author, is a malicious fabrication.

"3 Litchfield Street, Soho, London, November 2, 1859

Fidelio Hollinger"

"b) The undersigned, who has lived and worked in No. 3 Litchfield Street for the past eleven months, for his part testifies to the correctness of Herr Hollinger's statement.

"London, November 2, 1859

J. F. Wiehe, Compositor"

Vögele had nowhere asserted that Blind was the author of the pamphlet. Fidelio Hollinger therefore invents Vögele's assertion so as to be able to dismiss it as a "malicious fabrication". On the other hand, if the pamphlet was not printed in Hollinger's print-shop, how can the same Fidelio Hollinger be certain that Karl Blind was not its author?

And how can the circumstance that the compositor Wiehe "has lived and worked for eleven months" (up to November 2, 1859) with Hollinger enable him to testify to the "correctness of Fidelio Hollinger's statement"} My reply 3 to Blind's declaration (in No. 325 of the Allgemeine Zeitung, see "Magnum Opus", Documents, pp. 39, 40) concluded with the words: "The transfer of the trial from Augsburg to London would resolve the entire Blind-Vogt mystère." Blind, with all the moral indignation of a beautiful soul cut to the quick, returned to the attack in the "supplement to the 'Allgemeine Zeitung' of December 11, 1859":

"Having repeatedly" (we must take note of this) "based my testimony on the documents signed by Herr Hollinger, the printer, and Herr Wiehe, compositor, I declare here for the last time that the allegation (which is latterly put forward merely as an insinuation) that I am the author of the pamphlet frequently referred to is a downright untruth. The other statements about me contain distortions of the crudest sort. "

In a postscript to this declaration the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung remarked that "this discussion is of no further interest to the general public" and they therefore request "the gentlemen

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 8-9.— Ed.





**[p. 127]**

"In other words, the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung request Messrs. Marx, Biscamp* and Liebknecht, who stand revealed as barefaced liars, not to compromise themselves and the Allgemeine Zeitung any further."

Thus, for the time being, the Augsburg campaign came to an end.

Reverting to the tone of his Lousiad, Vogt made "Vögele the compositor" bear "false witness" to me and Liebknecht ("Magnum Opus", p. 195). He explained the origins of the pamphlet by suggesting that Blind

"may well have conceived various suspicions and have spread them abroad. The Brimstone Gang then used them to fabricate a pamphlet and other articles which they then attributed to Blind who found himself driven into a corner" (loc. cit., p. 218).

And if the Imperial Vogt failed to resume his indecisive campaign in London, as he had been challenged to do, this was partly because London was "a backwater" ("Magnum Opus", p. 229), but partly because the disputants "were accusing each other of lying" (loc. cit.).

The man's "critical immediacy" can only approve of the intervention of the courts if the parties are not disputing about the truth.

I now pass over three months and resume the thread of my story in the beginning of February 1860. Vogt's "Magnum Opus" had not yet reached London, but we had received the anthology of the Berlin National-Zeitung, which contained the following statement:

"It was very easy for the Marx party to lay the authorship of the pamphlet at Blind's door, just because the latter had previously uttered similar views in

* In a letter dated October 20 from London, Biscamp had written to the editors of the Allgemeine Zeitung in connection with the Vogt affair, ending up by offering his services as news correspondent.3 I knew nothing of this letter until I saw it in the Allgemeine Zeitung. Vogt has invented a moral doctrine according to which my support of a newspaper which has since folded up makes me responsible for the subsequent private letters written by its editor. How much more responsible would this make Vogt for Kolatschek's Stimmen der Zeit since he was a paid contributor to Kolatschek's Monatsschrift. When Biscamp was editing Das Volk, he made the greatest sacrifices. He gave up a job he had had for many years in order to take on the editorship; he edited the paper gratis in very trying circumstances and finally he jeopardised his position as news correspondent for German papers, such as the

Kölnische Zeitung, so that he could work in accordance with his convictions. Everything else did not and does not concern me.

a The Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300 (supplement), October 27, 1859.— Ed.



**[p. 128]**

Blind, like Falstaff who thought discretion the better part of valour,3 esteemed silence as the whole art of diplomacy, and so he began to be silent once again. To loosen his tongue I published a circular in English over my signature and dated London, February 4, 1860. (See Appendix 11.)

The circular, addressed to the editor of The Free Press, stated inter alia:

"Now, before taking any further step, I want to show up the fellows who evidently have played into the hands of Vogt. I, therefore, publicly declare that the statement of Blind, Wiehe and Hollinger, according to which the anonymous pamphlet was not printed in Hollinger's office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, is an infamous lie. " *

Having presented the evidence in my possession I end with the words:

"Consequently, I again declare the above said Charles Blind to be an infamous liar (deliberate liar). If I am wrong, he may easily confound me by appealing to an English Court of Law."b

On February 6, 1860 a London daily (the Daily Telegraph) — to which I shall return in due course—reproduced the anthology of the National-Zeitung, under the title "The Journalistic Auxiliaries of Austria".' However, I initiated an action for libel against the National-Zeitung, gave the Daily Telegraph notice of similar proceedings0 and set about assembling the necessary legal material.

On February 11, 1860 the compositor Vögele swore an affidavit before the Police Court in Bow Street. He repeated the essential contents of his declaration of September 17, 1859, namely that the manuscript of the pamphlet was in Blind's handwriting and that

* In the English original I said "a deliberate lie". The Kölnische Zeitung translated this as "infame Lüge" (infamous lie). I accept this translation, even though "durchtriebene Lüge" would be closer to the original.

a Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part I, Act V, Scene 4.— Ed. b Marx's circular (letter to the editor of The Free Press dated February 4, 1860, see this volume, p. 11) was written in English. The original text is reproduced here and in Appendix 11. The last sentence does not occur in the latter.— Ed.

c Marx gives the title in English and supplies the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

d See this volume, pp. 14-15.— Ed.



**[p. 129]**

Incomparably more important was the affidavit taken out by the compositor Wiehe, whose testimony Blind had repeatedly, and with growing self-confidence, quoted in the Allgemeine Zeitung.

Apart from the original (see Appendix 13) I am therefore giving here a word-for-word translation3:

"One of the first days of November last—I do not recollect the exact date—in the evening between nine and ten o'clock I was taken out of bed by Mr. F. Hollinger, in whose house I then lived, and by whom I was employed as compositor. He presented to me a paper to the effect, that, during the preceding eleven months I had been continuously employed by him, and that during all that time a certain German flysheet 'Zur Warnung' (A Warning) had not been composed and printed in Mr. Hollinger's Office, 3, Litchfie H Street, Soho. In my perplexed state, and not aware of the importance of the transaction, I complied with his wish, and copied, and signed the document. Mr. Hollinger promised me money, but I never received anything. During that transaction Mr. Charles Blind, as my wife informed me at the time, was waiting in Mr. Hollinger's room. A few days later, Mrs. Hollinger called me down from dinner and led me into her husband's room, where I found Mr. Blind alone. He presented me the same paper which Mr. Hollinger had presented me before, and entreated meh to write, and sign a second copy, as he wanted two, the one for himself, and the other for publication in the Press. He added that he would show himself grateful to me. I copied and signed again the paper.

"I herewith declare the truth of the above statements and that:

"1) During the eleven months mentioned in the document I was for six weeks not employed by Mr. Hollinger, but by a Mr. Ermani.

"2) I did not work in Mr. Hollinger's Office just at that time when the flysheet 'Zur Warnung' was published.

"3) I heard at the time from Mr. Vögele, who then worked for Mr. Hollinger, that he, Vögele, had, together with Mr. Hollinger himself, composed the flysheet in question, and that the manuscript was in Blind's handwriting.

"4) The types of the pamphlet were still standing when I returned to Mr. Hollinger's service. J myself broke them into columns for the reprint of the flysheet (or pamphlet) 'Zur Warnung' in the German paper Das Volk published by Mr. Hollinger, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho. The flysheet appeared in No. 7, d.d. 18th June 1859, of Das

Volk.

"5) I saw Mr. Hollinger give to Mr. William Liebknecht of 14, Church Street, Soho, the proofsheet of the pamphlet 'Zur Warnung', on which proofsheet Mr. Charles Blind with his own hand had corrected four or five mistakes. Mr. Hollinger hesitated at first giving the proofsheet to Mr. Liebknecht, and when Mr. Liebknecht had withdrawn, he, Hollinger, expressed to me and my fellow workman Vögele his regret for having given the proofsheet out of his hands.

Johann Friedrich Wiehe

a The original English text is given in Appendix 13. The various types of emphasis were introduced by Marx.— Ed.

b In his translation Marx gives the English words "entreated me" in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed.



**[p. 130]**

Th. Henry, Magistrate of the said court" (Police Court)

(Bow Street)

The two affidavits of the compositors Vögele and Wiehe proved that the manuscript of the pamphlet had been written in Blind's hand, composed in Hollinger's print-shop and that Blind himself had corrected the proofs.

And the homme d'état wrote to Julius Fröbel from London on July 4, 1859:

"A violent attack on Vogt has appeared here, accusing him of corruption. J do not know who is responsible for it. It contains a number of allegations of which we had not previously heard."a

And the same homme d'état wrote to Liebknecht on September 8, 1859, saying that

"he had nothing whatever to do with the problem in question".

Not content with these achievements citizen and statesman Blind had fabricated a false declaration and contrived to induce the compositor Wiehe to sign it by promises of money from Fidelio Hollinger and proofs of his own gratitude in the future.

This, his own fabrication with a signature obtained by false pretences and together with Fidelio Hollinger's false testimony, he not only sent to the Allgemeine Zeitung, but in his second declaration he even "refers" "repeatedly" to these "documents", and hurls the reproach of "downright untruth" at my head with every sign of moral indignation.

I had copies made of the two affidavits of Vögele and Wiehe and circulated them in different circles, whereupon a meeting took place at Blind's house attended by Blind, Fidelio Hollinger, and Blind's house-friend Herr Karl Schaible, M.D., a quiet decent fellow who plays the role of tame elephant in Blind's political operations.

In the Daily Telegraph of February 15, 1860 there appeared an item that was later reprinted in German newspapers and which went as follows:

"The Vogt-Pamphlet "To the Editor of The Daily Telegraph "Sir,

"In.consequence of erroneous statements which have been current, I feel I owe it to Mr. Blind, as well as to Mr. Marx, formally to declare that neither of them is

a Marx probably quotes this letter from the National-Zeitung, No. 41, July 4, 1859.— Ed.



**[p. 131]**

"London, 14 February, 1860

Charles Schaihle, M.D."

Herr Schaible sent me this declaration." I reciprocated his politeness by return of post by sending the affidavits of the compositors Vögele and Wiehe and wrote that his (Schaible's) declaration made no difference either to the false statements that Blind had sent to the Allgemeine Zeitung, or to Blind's conspiracy*3

with Hollinger to obtain Wiehe's signature for the false document he had fabricated.

Blind perceived that he was no longer on the firm territory of the Allgemeine Zeitung, but under the perilous jurisdiction of England. If he wanted to invalidate the affidavits and the "grave insults" of my circular based on them, he and Hollinger would have to swear counter-affidavits; but felony is no joke.

Eisele-Blind118 is not the author of the pamphlet, because Beisele-Schaibele publicly declares himself its author. Blind has only written the manuscript of the pamphlet; he has only had it printed by Hollinger, corrected the proofs in his own hand, fabricated false statements together with Hollinger in order to refute these facts and sent them to the Allgemeine Zeitung. But he is nevertheless a wronged innocent, because he was not the author or originator of the pamphlet. He acted only as Beisele-Schaibele's secretary. It is just for this reason that on July 4, 1859 he did not know "who" had brought the pamphlet into the world and on September 8, 1859 he had "nothing whatever to do with the problem in question". It may therefore reassure him that Beisele-Schaible is the author of the pamphlet in the literary sense of the word, but Eisele-Blind is its author in the technical sense of the English law, and the responsible publisher in the sense of all civilised legislation. Habeat sibi!c

A final word of farewell to Herr Beisele-Schaible. The lampoon published by Vogt against me in the Biel Handels-Courier, dated Berne, May 23, 1859, bore the title Zur Warnung. The pamphlet composed by Schaible and written out

a On this see Marx's letters to Engels of February 15, 1860 and to Legal Counsellor Weber of February 24, 1860 (present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed.

[^1]: b Marx uses the English word.— Ed. c So be it! Genesis 38:23.— Ed.





**[p. 132]**

However that may be, Schaible, the original denouncer of Vogt, has now publicly accepted responsibility for the information given in the pamphlet. Hence the Augsburg campaign ends not with the victory of the defendant Vogt, but with the appearance on the battlefield at long last of the accuser Schaible.

