---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "X. Patrons and Accomplices "
Page_Range: "239-284"
---

# X. Patrons and Accomplices 



**[p. 214]**

X

PATRONS AND ACCOMPLICES

Principibus placuisse viris non ultima laus est.3

As guarantors of his "good behaviour" b the ex-Vogt of the Empire proposes

"Kossuth" and "the two other men—Fazy, the regenerator of Geneva, and Klapka, the defender of Komorn" —whom he "proudly calls his friends" ("Magnum Opus", p. 213).

I call them his patrons. After the battle of Komorn (July 2, 1849) Görgey usurped the supreme command of the Hungarian army in defiance of the orders of the Hungarian Government, which had dismissed him.

"If an energetic man had stood at the head of the government," writes Colonel Lapinski, who was still a supporter of Kossuth when he wrote his book, "a stop could have been put to all of Görgey's intrigues even at that time. Kossuth needed only to come into the camp and say a few words to the army and all of Görgey's popularity would not have saved him from defeat But Kossuth did not come; he was not forceful enough to oppose Görgey in public and so while he intrigued against the general in secret, he attempted to justify the latter's misdemeanours in the eyes of the world." (Th. Lapinski, Feldzug der Ungarischen Hauptarmee, etc.. pp. 125, 126).

On his own admission, Kossuth was officially informed of Görgey's intended betrayal some time later by General Guyon (see David Urquhart, Visit to the Hungarian Exiles at Kutayahc).

"It is true that-Kossuth did say in the course of a fine speech in Szeged that if he knew that anyone was a traitor he would murder him with his own hands. He may have had Görgey in mind as he spoke. However, not only did he not carry out this somewhat theatrical threat, he did not even tell all his Ministers just whom he

a To have pleased great men is not the greatest glory (Horace, Epistles, I, 17).— Ed.

b Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. c Kiitahya.— Ed.



**[p. 215]**

On August 11, 1849, on Görgey's orders, Kossuth issued a manifesto, ostensibly from the fortress of Arad, announcing his abdication and conferring on Görgey "supreme government authority in both military and civilian affairs". He went on to say:

"After the unfortunate outcome of the battles which God has visited upon the nation in recent days, there is no longer any hope that we can continue our defensive struggle against the combined forces of the two great powers [] with any prospect of success." a

Having thus stated at the beginning of the manifesto that Hungary's cause was irrevocably lost, and moreover as a result of Divine visitation, Kossuth goes on to make Görgey "responsible before God for deploying the power" placed by Kossuth at his disposal "for the salvation" of Hungary. He trusted Görgey enough to deliver Hungary up to him, but too little to deliver up his own person to him. His personal distrust of Görgey was so intense that he contrived it so that the arrival of his deed of abdication in Görgey's hands coincided with his own arrival on Turkish soil. This is why he concludes his manifesto with the words:

What he had sacrificed on the altar of his country, handing it over te) Görgev, was the government, the title to which however he at once usurped again under Turkish protection.

In Kütahya His Excellency, the Governor in partibus, received a copy of the first Blue Book on the Hungarian catastrophe laid before Parliament by Palmerston.b As he wrote to David Urquhart, the study of these diplomatic documents convinced him that "Russia had a spy, nay an agent even, in every Cabinet" and that in the

:i Lajos Kossuth, "An die Nation! Festung Arad am 11. August 1849". Quoted in Theophil Lapinski's Feldzug der Ungarischen Hauptarmee, Hamburg, 1850, S. Mb.—Ed. h Correspondence relative to the Affairs of Hungary, 1847-1849. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty. August 15, 1850, London.— Ed.

[^1]: "If my death can be of any use to my country, I shall sacrifice my own life with j ( >y"





**[p. 216]**

After he was freed from internment in Turkey Kossuth sailed to England. Off the coast of Marseilles, where he was forbidden to land, he issued a manifesto whose tenor and phraseology were those of French social democracy/ Having set foot on English soil he at once repudiated

"that novel doctrine, social democracy, which rightly or wrongly is held to be incompatible with social order and the security of property. Hungary neither has nor wishes to have anything to do with these doctrines, if only for the extremely simple reason that in Hungary there is no opportunity nor even the slightest inducement for them to be introduced." d (Cf. the letter from Marseilles.)

During the first two weeks of his stay in England he changed his confession of faith as frequently as his audience—he was all things to all men. Count Kasimir Batthyâny gave this explanation of his public breach with Kossuth which took place at this time:

"It is not just the bévuese that Kossuth has committed in the first two weeks since his release that have induced me to take this step, but all my experience of him, everything I have seen, suffered, allowed, endured, and, as you will recall, disguised and concealed, at first in Hungary and then in exile,— in short it is a matter of the opinion I have formed about the man Permit me to remark that whatever Mr. Kossuth has said or may say in Southampton, Wisbech or London, in England, in short, cannot undo what he said in Marseilles. In the land of the 'young giant'" (America) "he will again sing a different tune, for just as he is unscrupulousf in other matters and bends like a reed beneath any gust of wind, so too does he gainsav his own words sans geneß and does not hesitate to hide behind

* Kossuth did not understand then how Palmerston's feigned hostility to Russia "could" deceive anyone of ordinary intelligence. "How could a man of. any intellect for a single moment believe that the Minister who allowed Russia's intervention in Hungary, would give the word of attack against her?" (Letter dated Kutayah, December 17, 1850. Correspondence of Kossuth.)

c Lajos Kossuth, "An die Marseiller Démocratie" [Bord des Mississippi, 29. September 1851], quoted in Gustav von Alvensleben's L. Kossuth nach der Capitulation

von Vilagos, Weimar, 1852, S. 65-66.— Ed.

d From Kossuth's speech at a workers' meeting at Copenhagen House. Quoted in Authentic Life of His Excellency Louis Kossuth, London, 1851, p. 76.— Ed.

s Without the slightest embarrassment.— Ed.

[^1]: a Marx uses the English phrase "dear Hungary".— Ed. b Marx quotes this sentence in English and gives its German equivalent in brackets.— Ed.

[^2]: e Blunders.— Ed f Marx gives the English words "unscrupulous" and, further on in the text, "a most undeserving heart" in brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed





**[p. 217]**

Kossuth's performance in the United States, where he spoke against slavery in the North and for slavery in the South, left behind nothing but a great sense of disappointment and 300 dead speeches. Bringing the curtain down hastily on this peculiar episode, I would only remark that he strongly recommended the Germans in the United States, and in particular the German emigration, to conclude an alliance between Germany, Hungary and Italy, to the exclusion of France (and not just the coup d'état government, but France itself, and even the French emigration together with the parties in France represented by it). No sooner had he returned to London than he attempted to establish relations with Louis Bonaparte through the agency of Count Szirmay, a dubious character, and through Colonel Kiss in Paris (see my letter in the New-York Tribune of September 28, 1852 and my public declaration in the same paper on November 16, 1852a).

During the Mazzini rising in Milan in 1853 188 a proclamation appeared on the walls of the town addressed to the Hungarian troops stationed there and calling on them to join the Italian insurgents.11 It bore the signature: Louis Kossuth. Scarcely had the news of the defeat of the insurgents reached London when Kossuth hastened to publish a statement in The Times" and other English papers, declaring the proclamation to be a forgery and thereby publicly contradicting his friend Mazzini. The proclama- tion was nevertheless authentic. Mazzini had obtained it from Kossuth, he owned the original manuscript in Kossuth's handwrit- ing and he had acted in concert with Kossuth. Convinced that Austrian despotism in Italy could only be overthrown by the united action of Italy and Hungary, Mazzini then first tried to replace Kossuth with a more reliable Hungarian leader, but after this attempt had failed because of the divisions within the Hungarian emigration, he forgave his unreliable ally and maga Karl Marx, "Movements of Mazzini and Kossuth.— League with Louis Napoleon.— Palmerston" and "Kossuth, Mazzini, and Louis Napoleon. To the Editor of The N. Y. Tribune, London, November 16, 1852" (see present edition, Vol. 11).—Ed.

b L. Kossuth, "In the Name of the Hungarian Nation. To the Soldiers Quartered in Italy, February 1853", The Times, No. 21348, February 10, 1853.— Ed.

r "Italy. The 'Voce della Verita!'", The Times, No. 21366, March 3, 1853.— Ed.



**[p. 218]**

The same year, 1853, it will be remembered, saw the beginning of the Russo-Turkish war. On December 17, 1850 Kossuth had written to David Urquhart from Kütahya:

"Take away the Turkish supremacy from Turkey and it will cease to be. And after all, as matters stand, Turkey is indispensably necessary to the freedom of the world." a

His enthusiasm for the Turks was even greater in a letter he wrote to the Grand Vizier Reshid Pasha on February 15, 1851. In extravagant phrases he offered his services to the Turkish Government. On January 22, 1852, during his tour of the United States, he wrote to David Urquhart:

"Would you feel inclined, knowing how much the interests of Hungary and Turkey were identical, to plead my cause at Constantinople? The Porte did not know who I am when I was there. My reception in England and America, and the position in which the chances of fortune, and I may say Providence, have placed me, could show the Porte that I am a true friend, and perhaps a not uninfluential one, of Turkey and her future."

On November 5, 1853 he wrote to Mr. Crawshay (an Urquhar- tist), offering to go to Constantinople as an ally of Turkey, but "not with empty hands",b and therefore asked Mr. Crawshay to raise funds

"by private applications addressed confidentially to such liberal men as might well afford the assistance he required".

In this letter he says: "I hate and despise the artifice of making revolutions." At the same time as he was penning letters to the Urquhartists that overflowed with hatred of revolutions and love for the Turks, he issued manifestos together with Mazzini which proclaimed the expulsion of the Turks from Europe and the transformation of Turkey into an "oriental Switzerland", and also signed the exhortations to revolution in general put out by the so-called Central Committee of European Democracy.189

Since as early as the end of 1853 Kossuth had aimlessly squandered the money he had collected in America in 1852 by his speechifying in the name of Hungary, and since moreover his plea to Mr. Crawshay fell on deaf ears, the Governor abandoned his intended chivalrous journey to Constantinople, but instead he sent

a Here and below Marx quotes from the article "Data by Which to Judge of Kossuth", The Free Press, No. 5, May 27, 1859. The italics are in the article.— Ed.

b Marx gives the English words "not with empty hands" and, below, "I hate and despise the artifice of making revolutions" in brackets after their German equivalents.— Ed.



**[p. 219]**

* I myself had made the acquaintance of Bangya in London in 1850, together with his friend at the time, the present General Tiirr. His underhand dealings with parties of every complexion, Orleanists, Bonapartists, etc., and his association with policemen of every "nationality" made me suspect him, but he dispelled my suspicions quite simply by showing me a document in Kossuth's own hand in which he (who had formerly been provisional chief commissioner of the police in Komorn3 under Klapka) was appointed chief commissioner of the police in partions. As a secret chief of police in the service of the revolution he naturally had to keep in "touch" with police in the service of the governments. In the course of the summer of 1852 I discovered that he had appropriated a manuscriptb I had asked him to convey to a bookseller in Berlin and steered it into the hands of a German government. After I had written to a Hungarian in Paris0 describing this incident and a number of other striking peculiarities of the man's, and after the Bangya mystery had been completely cleared up thanks to the intervention of a third person well informed in the matter,d I sent an open denunciation, signed by myself, to the New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung early in 1853.e In a letter, still in my possession, in which he attempted to justify his actions, Bangya emphasised that I had less reason than anyone to regard him as a spy, since he had always (and this was perfectly true) avoided discussing with me the affairs of my own party. Although Kossuth and his supporters did not drop Bangya at the time, my revelations in the Criminal-Zeitung made it nevertheless difficult for him to continue operating in London and so he was all the more ready to grasp the opportunity provided by the troubles in the Orient of employing his talents in another setting. Soon after the conclusion of the Peace of Paris in 1856 I saw from the English newspapers that a certain Mehemed Bey, a colonel in the Turkish service, formerly a Christian known under the name of Johann Bangya, had sailed from Constantinople to Circassia, in the company of some Polish refugees, and that once there he figured as Sepher Pasha's Chief of the General Staff, and as what might be termed the "Simon Bolivar" of the Circassians. In the columns of the London Free Press, of which many copies are sent to Constantinople, I drew attention to the liberator's past.f On January 20, 1858 Bangya was, as is mentioned in the text, sentenced to death in Aderbi by a military tribunal of the Polish Legion under the command of Colonel Th. Lapinski for plotting treason against Circassia. As Bangya was a Turkish colonel, Sepher Pasha decided that execution of the sentence was incompatible with the respect due to the Sublime Porte and therefore shipped the condemned man to Trebizond from where he soon returned to Constantinople, a free man. In the meantime the Hungarian emigration in Constantinople had enthusiastically taken up his cause against the Poles. Shielded from the Divan (which, since he was a "colonel", had moreover to feed both him and his harem) by the protection of the Russian Embassy, and from the Poles by

a Komârom.— Ed. b The pamphlet The Great Men of the Exile by Marx and Engels (see present edition, Vol. 11).— Ed.

c Gustav Zerfy (see Marx's letter to him of December 28, 1852, present edition, Vol. 39).— Ed.

d Bartholomäus Szemere.— Ed. e See Karl Marx, "Hirsch's Confession" (present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed. f Karl Marx, "A Traitor in Circassia", The Free Press, No. 34, April 1, 1857.— Ed.



**[p. 220]**

"My political action was entirely dictated by the chief of my country, Louis Kossuth Provided with letters of introduction from my political chief, I came to Constantinople on the 22nd December, 1853."e

He goes on to describe how he became a Moslem and entered the Turkish service with the rank of colonel.

"My instructions" (from Kossuth) "insisted that I should get attached in some way or other to troops which were to take part in operations on the Circassian coast."

His task there was to prevent the Circassians from taking any part in the war against Russia. He carried out his mission successfully and towards the close of the war he sent "Kossuth a detailed account of the situation in Circassia" from Constan- tinople. Before his second expedition to Circassia, which he undertook together with the Poles, he received an order from Kossuth to collaborate with certain Hungarians, among whom was General Stein (Ferhad Pasha). s

the prejudices of his fellow-countrymen, Bangya coolly proceeded to publish a self-apologia in the Journal de Constantinople. However, a Circassian deputation arrived presently and this put an end to his games. The Hungarian emigration officially dropped their favourite, though de très mauvaise grâce.3 All the papers relating to the military tribunal in Aderbi, including Bangya's own confession of guilt, and all the documents produced later in Constantinople were sent on to London by the Polish emigration, and once there they were published in extracts in The Free Press (May 1858).b The documents were also published more extensively by me in the New-York [Daily] Tribune on June 16, 1858.c

a With great reluctance.— Ed. b "Extract from the Minutes of the Council of War, held at Aderbi", The Free Press, No. 16, May 12, 1858.— Ed.

c See "A Curious Piece of History", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5352.— Ed. d "Sentence. January 20, 1858", The Free Press, No. 16, May 12, 1858.— Ed. e Here and below Marx quotes from "Confession of Bangya before the Council of War", ibid.— Ed.



**[p. 221]**

Bangya's treachery came to light in Circassia when a letter to Philipson, the Russian general, was intercepted.

"In conformity with my instructions," Bangya says, "I was to get in touch with the Russian general. For a long time I could not make up my mind to do this, but at last I received orders so precise that it was impossible for me to hesitate any longer."

The proceedings of the military tribunal in Aderbi and especially Bangya's confession made a great sensation in Constan- tinople, London and New York. Kossuth was repeatedly and urgently pressed, even from the Hungarian side, to make a public statement, but to no avail. To this day he has maintained timorous silence on Bangya's mission in Circassia.

In the autumn of 1858 Kossuth was busy hawking around England and Scotland moderately priced lectures in which he denounced the Austrian concordat190 and Louis Bonaparte. The passionate fanaticism with which he warned the English to beware of the treacherous designs of Louis Bonaparte, whom he described as the secret ally of Russia, can be seen, e.g., from The Glasgow Sentinel of November 20, 1858.b When Louis Bonaparte revealed his Italian plans early in 1859, Kossuth denounced him in

Mazzinïs Pensiero ed Azione and warned "all true republicans", Italians, Hungarians and even Germans, to beware of allowing themselves to be used as a cat's-paw by the Imperial Quasimodo. In February 1859 Kossuth ascertained that Colonel Kiss, Count Teleki and General Klapka, all of whom had long since belonged to the red camarilla of the Palais Royal, were hatching a conspiracy with Plon-Plon to provoke an uprising in Hungary. Kossuth now threatened a public polemic in the English press unless he too were admitted to the "secret league". Plon-Plon was more than willing to open the doors of the conclave to him. Travelling under the name of Mr. Brown and furnished with an English passport, Kossuth went to Paris in the beginning of May. He hastened to the Palais Royal and expounded his plans for a Hungarian uprising to Plon-Plon at great length.191 On the evening of May 3 the Prince Rouge accompanied the ex- Governor to the Tuileries in his own carriage, to present him there to the saviour of society. Throughout the meeting with Louis

[^1]: a Apollinary Petrovich Butenev.— Ed. b This refers to the article "Louis Kossuth and Panslavism".— Ed.





**[p. 222]**

I take his repudiation of republicanism to be sincere. A civil list of 300,000 florins, claimed in Pest to maintain the dignity of the executive; the transfer of the patronage of the hospitals from an Austrian Archduchessb to his sisterc; the attempt to christen a number of regiments with the name of Kossuth; his efforts to form a camarilla; the stubbornness with which he clung to the title of governor when abroad, a title which he had renounced in the moment of danger; his entire subsequent behaviour, much more that of a pretender than a refugee—all that points to tendencies alien to republicanism.

After his formal cleaning of the suspicion of republicanism, an agreement was reached placing 3 million francs at Mr. Kossuth's disposal. There was nothing objectionable about this clause in itself since money was needed to finance the military organisation of the Hungarian refugees, and why should the Governor be denied the same right to receive subsidies from his new ally as had

* That such matters come to light appears less strange if it is borne in mind that at least two loquacious parties were involved here. Incidentally, English papers reported these facts during Kossuth's stay in London (in the late summer of 1859).

[^1]: a Marx uses the English expression.— Ed. b Maria Theresa.— Ed. c Zsuzsânna Meszlenyi.— Ed.





**[p. 223]**

Before Kossuth left the Tuileries it was agreed that he should undertake to neutralise the alleged "Austrian tendencies" of the Derby Ministry by launching a neutrality campaign in England. It is known how the voluntary support of the Whigs and the Manchester School enabled him to carry out this initial part of the agreement with the greatest success. A lecturing tour from the Mansion House in London to the Free Trade Hall in Manchester formed an antithesis to the Anglo-Scottish tour of autumn 1858 when he hawked his hatred of Bonaparte and Cherbourg, "the standing menace to England",0 at a shilling per head.

The larger part of the Hungarian emigration in Europe had withdrawn its support for Kossuth since the end of 1852. The prospect of an invasion of the Adriatic coast with French assistance brought the majority back to his flag. His negotiations with the military sector of his new-found supporters were not without a certain Decembrist flavour. In order to be in a position to assign a larger amount of French money to them he advanced them to higher military rank, lieutenants, for instance, were promoted to major. To begin with each man received travelling expenses to Turin, then a lavish sum for a uniform (the cost of a major's outfit amounted to £150), and finally six months' advance of salary with the promise of one year's retirement pay after the conclusion of peace. The salaries themselves were not unduly high: 10,000 francs c for the supreme general (Klapka), 6,000 francs for the generals, 5,000 for the brigadiers, 4,000 for the lieutenant- colonels, 3,000 for the majors, and so on. The Hungarian forces assembled in Turin consisted almost entirely of officers without

a The Free Press of September 28, 1859 ("Particulars of Kossuth's Transaction with Louis Napoleon"), and the New-York Daily Tribune of September 24, 1859 ("Kossuth and Louis Napoleon") have: "75,000 francs".— Ed.

b Marx uses the English phrases "lecturing tour" and "the standing menace to England".— Ed.

c The Free Press of September 28, 1859 has: "12,000 francs".— Ed.



**[p. 224]**

General Moritz Perczel, as has already been mentioned, resigned publicly as soon as he had seen through the diplomatic game. Despite Louis Bonaparte's order to the contrary, Klapka insisted on a landing near Fiume, but Kossuth made sure that the Hungarian refugee corps stayed within the theatrical limits laid down by the director of the troupe.

The rumours of the peace signed at Villafranca had hardly arrived in Turin when Kossuth, terrified of being handed over to the Austrians, took to his heels and escaped to Geneva, secretly, behind the back of the military forces at his disposal. At the time neither the name of Francis Joseph, nor that of Louis Bonaparte, stood in such bad odour in the Hungarian camp in Turin as that of Louis Kossuth, but for the fact that the comic side of his latest escapade somewhat overshadowed all criticism. On his return Kossuth published in London a letter to his tame elephant, a certain Mc Adam in Glasgow,3 declaring himself to be disillusioned, but not cheated and closing with the emotional statement that he had nowhere to lay his head and that therefore all letters for him should be sent to his friend F. Pulszky who had offered shelter to the refugee. The more than Anglo-Saxon gruffness with which the London press intimated to Kossuth that he should use the Bonapartist subsidies to rent himself a house in London convinced him that for the time being his role in London was at an end.

Apart from his talent as an orator Kossuth also possesses the great gift of silence as soon as the audience shows definite signs of displeasure or he finds himself at a loss for words by which to justify himself. Like the sun he knows all about eclipses. That he was capable of consistency at least once in his life was demon- strated by his recent letter to Garibaldi in which he warned him not to make an attack on Rome lest he offend the Emperor of the French, "the only support of the oppressed nationalities".b

Just as, in the first half of the eighteenth century, Alberoni was known as the colossal cardinal, so we may think of Kossuth as a colossal Langenschwarz. He is essentially an improviser who is

a Passages from the letter were quoted in a leading article in The Times, No. 23428, October 4, 1859. A statement by Mc Adam to the effect that Kossuth's letter was a private one was published in The Times, No. 23431, October 7. Marx mentioned the fact in a letter to Bartholomäus Szemere on October 8 (see present edition, Vol. 40).— Ed.

b Cf. Kossuth's letter to Garibaldi, Turin, September 14, in L. Kossuth, Meine Schriften aus der Emigration, Bd. III, S. 24.— Ed.



**[p. 225]**

It would be quite unjust to place General Klapka, Vogt's second patron, on the same level as Kossuth. Klapka was one of the best Hungarian revolutionary generals. Like the majority of officers who gathered in Turin in 1859 he regards Louis Bonaparte much as Franz Râkôczy regarded Louis XIV. In their eyes Louis Bonaparte represents France's military power, a power which might serve Hungary but which, if only on geographical grounds, could never endanger it.* But why does Vogt appeal to the authority of Klapka? Klapka has never made a secret of the fact that he belongs to Plon-Plon's red camarilla. So that "friend" Klapka can vouch for "friend" Vogt? Klapka has shown no great talent in the selection of his friends. One of his closest friends in Komorn was Colonel Assermann. Let us hear about this Colonel Assermann from Colonel Lapinski, who served under Klapka up to the surrender of Komorn and who subsequently distinguished himself in Circassia fighting against the Russians.

* Although I can understand how Klapka can entertain such views, it is astonishing to find similar ones in the above-quoted work of Szemere'sa and I have frankly told him what I think of it in this respect.b I find it even harder to understand his latest statement about the Austrian concession.192 I am aware that Szemere does not allow private considerations to influence his decisions on public affairs and that he had very important reasons for declaring that with the concessions granted by Vienna, the Hungarians could take all they wanted in Pest; that any Hungarian insurrection from abroad, especially with the aid of the French, would necessarily provoke Russian intervention in Hungary, whether for or against Austria; and finally, that the autonomy granted to Transylvania, Slavonia and Croatia, as well as to the Voivodina, would at this particular moment ensure that the Vienna Cabinet had the loyalty of these "nationalities" against the Magyars just as it did in 1848-49. All that is true enough, but could have been said without appearing to recognise the Hungarian Constitution "in usum delphini " 193 in the mutilated Viennese edition.

a This refers to Bartholomäus Szemere's pamphlet Hungary, from 1848 to 1860, London, I860.— Ed.

[^1]: b Marx to Szemere, June 2, 1860 (see present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed.





**[p. 226]**

The memoirs of both Görgey and Klapkab provide no less eloquent testimony to Klapka's lack of character and political understanding. All the errors he committed during the defence of Komorn stem from this defect.

"If Klapka with his knowledge and patriotism a/50 had a firm will of his own, and if he had acted in accordance with opinions he had formed himself, rather than with those suggested to him by fools and cowards, the defence of Komorn would sparkle in the annals of history like a meteor" (loc. cit., p. 209).

On August 3, Klapka had gained a brilliant victory over the besieging Austrian corps at Komorn, he had scattered it and put it out of action for some time. He followed this up by taking Raabc

a Theophil Lapinski, Feldzug der Ungarischen Hauptarmee im Jahre 1849.—Ed. b Arthur Görgey's Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 1849, Bd. 1-2, Leipzig, 1852, and Memoiren von Georg Klapka. April bis October 1849, Leipzig, 1850.— Ed.

[^1]: c Now Györ.— Ed.





**[p. 227]**

"an adjutant of the Emperor Nicholas arrived in Komorn on August 22 But, said the Russian Mephisto in honeyed tones, surely you will grant us a two weeks' armistice, General. It is His Majesty, my gracious Emperor, who is asking you! This worked like a quick poison. Where the efforts of the Austrian spokesmen and the arguments of the Russian negotiators had failed, this cunning Russian emissary succeeded with a few brief words. Klapka could not resist the subtle compliment and signed an armistice for 14 days. The fall of Komorn dates from this act".b

Klapka allowed the armistice to be used by Colonel Assermann, as we have already mentioned, to disperse in two weeks the provisions of the fortress, which would have lasted a whole year. At the end of the armistice Grabbe invested Komorn from the Vag, while the Austrians, whose forces had gradually grown to 40,000 men, camped on the right bank of the Danube. The inactive life behind the walls and fortifications demoralised the troops inside Komorn. Klapka did not launch a single attack on the Russian besieging corps, which had seen no action yet and was only 19,000 strong. The enemy's preparations for the siege were not disturbed for an instant. In fact, from the moment he had signed the armistice, Klapka prepared everything not for defence but for capitulation. The only energy he showed was of an inquisitorial nature and was directed at the upright officers who were opposed to capitulation.

"In the end," Lapinski says, "it became dangerous to say anything about the Austrians if one wished to avoid arrest."

Finally, on September 27, the capitulation was signed.

"In view of the power, of the desperate situation of the nation, which had put its last hopes in Komorn," Lapinski says, "in view of the situation in Europe and the impotence of Austria, which would have made the greatest sacrifices for the sake of Komorn, the surrender conditions were as wretched as could be imagined."0

[^1]: a Rimavska Sobota.— Ed. b Theophil Lapinski, op. cit., S. 201-02.— Ed. c Ibid., S. 230.— Ed.





**[p. 228]**

So much for Klapka. If Vogt is lacking in "character", Klapka is the last man to make good the deficiency.

Vogt's third patron is "James Fazy, the regenerator of Geneva",3

as he is described by Vogt, his court jester. The following letters, written by Johann Philipp Beckerh to the addressee of his letter reproduced earlier,0 contain a portrait of Fazy which is so apt that any additional comment will only spoil it. I would make only one preliminary remark. The most nauseating feature of Vogt's so-called Studien is the hypocritical show of Lutheran and even Calvinist horror of the "ultramontane party ".l95 Thus, for example, he confronts Germany with the absurd alternative of either giving Louis Bonaparte a free hand or submitting to the domination of the Austrian concordat, and "verily we should rather prefer to undergo a second period of national humiliation" (Studien, p. 52). In the nasal tones of the puritan he fumes about

"the ultramontane party, the sworn enemy of humanity, this monster that is attacking its very core" (loc. cit., p. 120).d

He has of course never heard of the fact which even Dupin Aîné revealed in the Decembrist Senate, that

"under Louis Bonaparte's régime the congregations, associations and founda- tions of all kinds directly subject to the Order of Jesuits have become more numerous than they were under the ancien régime, and that all the state regulations which restricted the ultramontane organs of propaganda even before 1789 have been systematically dismantled by Decembrist legislation and administration".

But Vogt must at any rate know that the rule of his local Bonaparte, M. James Fazy, is based on a long-standing coalition between the so-called radical party and the ultramontane party. When the Vienna Congress incorporated Geneva, the traditional home of Calvinism, into the Swiss Confederation, it added to its

a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 213.— Ed. b Becker wrote them at Marx's request (see Marx's letter to him of April 9, 1860, present edition, Vol. 41). For tactical reasons Becker addressed them to Georg Friedrich Rheinländer.— Ed.

c See this volume, pp. 60-64.— Ed. d The words in quotation marks are Marx's summary of several passages from the Studien.—Ed.



**[p. 229]**

"Paris, July 2, 1860 "Dear R,

"At long last I really must comply with your wish and give you my opinion of M. James Fazy

"Just as the political sciences are of no avail unless one knows how to apply them in real life, so too statesmanship is sterile unless it is based on science and philosophical thought. A so-called statesman who has nothing but theory will not fool anyone and he will soon reveal his incapacity. On the other hand, a man who has a one-track talent for statesmanship can more easily conceal his lack of knowledge and intellectual prowess, he may pass for a practical statesman and gain the support of the great market of mediocrity. Whether or not the rule of such a man can advance the culture of a nation and can create conditions ensuring its undisturbed progress, lies beyond the powers of judgment of the blindly adulating crowd. If there is only the appearance that things are going well and are improving and if onlv everything is done in the name of freedom and civilisation!

"M. James Fazy is an outstanding specimen of the breed of political virtuosos. This astute man is distinguished not only for his statecraft but largely for his political craftiness. He resorts to all sorts of artifices and produces tours de force as often as the 'public interest' requires it, but with his usual cunning avoids every salto mortale. Full of guile in his manipulation of roles behind the scenes, a skilful director and prompter, he is the ne plus ultra of a French actor. His 'strength of character', which recoils from nothing if only it will serve his purposes, would be much to be admired, were it not for the fact that it is so intimately bound up with the disreputable nature of those purposes. Once one is familiar with the man's lack of principles and moral character, one will be less inclined to admire his ingenuity in devising means and his adroitness in employing them. This political virtuoso contrives by a sleight of hand boldly to appropriate everything good that occurs in the life of the people he governs; he then presents it to the great mass of the people in his own name so that they believe and are prepared to swear that it has all been brought about by or through the agency of 'Papa Fazy'. With equal skill he manages to shrug off the responsibility for everything that is bad or unpopular and to blame it on others. In his government he will not endure any independent personality, his colleagues must submit to being arbitrarily repudiated or forced to act as godfather for his abortive undertakings. Submitting to his despotic brutality à discrétion,3 they have always to be prepared to act as the scapegoats and whipping-boys for the sake of the people and the glory of their President. Just as a crowned monarch will always ask himself whether a political measure will damage his dynasty, however much it may be to the advantage of the people, before he 'is pleased' to approve it, so too Papa Fazy asks himself, whenever he plans to take action: 'Will it not topple my presidential chair?' Hence our hero always adapts his policies to circumstances and lives from hand to mouth: on one day he will act out an uproarious comedy in the government, the next dav he will perform a conjuring trick in the Grand Council and the day after that he will produce a sensational

[^1]: a Unconditionally.— Ed.





**[p. 230]**

"All that has been achieved in Geneva in fifteen years by an energetic generation he has chalked up to the credit of his rule, or he has caused his lackeys and worshippers to do so. The demolition of the fortifications, the impressive extension and improvement of the capital of the Canton, for instance, pass for his achievement. But every administration, including that of M. Fazy, would have been ruthlessly pushed aside if it had attempted to resist the mighty pressure from the populace to tear down fortifications that had become useless and to expand a town in which health conditions were increasingly deteriorating because of the terrible overcrowding. This question thus also became a question of Fazy's own survival and he energetically took it in hand — honour to whom honour is due—and has helped to carry out many improvements to the general satisfaction of the public. But without arrogant insolence no individual can set himself up as the originator or creator of what has been achieved by the strenuous and joint efforts of a whole generation to satisfy a great need of the age. It is only society as a whole that creates, and then only in a relative sense, an integral whole, to which the members according to their strength and position contribute a larger or smaller share. Blind faith in the authorities is a superstition like any other and is detrimental to any healthy development.

"I am well aware that our M. Fazy is like everyone else in that he only does those things which he cannot refrain from doing, and he only refrains from doing things that he cannot do, and that like every living being, in his desire to develop his own individuality completely, he pursues his own needs. It is just as impossible to expect him to act otherwise as to demand that a cat should go into the water of its own accord or a horse climb trees. If he acted differently he would not be James Fazy, and if he were not James Fazy he might perhaps be Louis Bonaparte or something of the sort. If greatness in a man who possesses power is to keep a people in leading-strings, to dazzle them with conjuring tricks, without impressing the stamp of intensive progress on their moral and intellectual culture, but instead branding society with the marks of corruption, then Fazy would surely be great and worthy of being envied by tyrants more powerful than he.

"He is as capable as anyone of sustaining contradictory policies and from them he produces the magic formula with which, as with a compass, he steers his little ship of state. At one moment radicalism will supply the crew and ultramontanism the cargo, at another, it will be the other way about—just as it suits the book and the latest tactics of the helmsman. So the machine of state is constantly in motion, heaving from one side to the other, like the balance wheel of a watch. And with what a happy effect! The radicals swear that things are moving forwards, the ultramontanists are convinced that they are going backwards. Both views are correct; both sides are happy in their faith and the Lord God Fazy remains at the helm.

"Now, my dear friend, let these lines be enough for the moment.

"Warmest greetings from

Your Joh. Philipp Becker"



**[p. 231]**

"Dear R,

"So you think that my portrait of Fazy is perhaps somewhat exaggerated. By no means, my dear friend! Moreover, one cannot just think and judge things and people according to one's whims, but only in accordance with the logic of one's understanding and inner experience. Anyone whose words differ from his thoughts in such matters, and whose acts differ from his words, is untrue to himself and a scoundrel.

"Fazy, who received his earliest education in a Herrnhut school196 in Neu- wied and speaks good German, still gives the appearance, at the age of 65, of judg- ing Germany and its people according to the impressions gained at that model ins- titution. Nothing German, and even Swiss German, is to his taste, and only in rare cases does he make an exception of this. As a native of Geneva and as a man who has spent a long time in the United States of North America, he is intimately familiar with republican institutions, with the methods of agitation and, owing to his natural disposition, especially with the various stratagems of intrigue. He is more of a demagogue than a democrat and his chief political slogan, his badge:

laissez aller et laissez faire,1^ would not be so bad, if only he could refrain from having a finger in every pie in which people attempt to do something without the blessing of the state. His interventions are designed either to achieve something that adds to his own glory, or where this proves to be impossible, to frustrate the enterprise, as he did in the project of Herr Mayer and others to establish the Banque de Crédit et d'Échange and to set up a Chamber of Commerce. During the Genevan revolution of 1846198 M. James acted in accordance with the precept: away from the danger zone makes for a long life, and he thought more of how to escape than of how to win. He was just on the point of leaving Geneva in secret when Albert Galeer, the heart and soul of the entire movement, made a last mighty effort to resolve the struggle which had long raged indecisively, and gained a total victory. Galeer, who was single-mindedly devoted to the cause and cared nothing lor fame, firmly believed, at least at that time, that Fazy was motivated by a sincere love of the people. He was not at all put out when that hero, who had been saved from a precipitate flight in the nick of time, posed as the conqueror at a popular assembly immediately after the victory. Galeer himself could not contemplate a government post for himself immediately after the revolution, especially as he was not a Genevan, but a citizen of the Canton of Berne and so could neither vote nor be elected according to the confederate laws in force at the time. It is true that citizenship was soon conferred on him and after that he was elected into the Grand Council and was also given a post as translator of state papers. As the focus of the most energetic among the young people of Geneva he became a firm pillar of radical rule. Thanks to him Fazy's position as the hero of the great mass was strengthened still further. Using the phraseology of French radicalism which he had acquired when working on Le National in Paris in the day of Louis Philippe, James Fazy agitated in the press and on the podium, disguising his true thoughts and desires to his heart's content. Nevertheless, despite all his demagoguery a year had scarcely passed before he began to be seriously accused in various circles of entertaining secret relations with the leaders of the ultramontane party, and soon after of being a Francophile. In German Switzerland, where people look at these things mote coolly and their judgments are more detached, they seem to have seen through his game even earlier. Towards the end of 1847, immediately after the conclusion of the Sonderbund War, M. James Fazy went to the offices of the War Department to pay a call on General Ochsenbein; I was the only person there, as Ochsenbein was with the rest of the officers ^isiting the wounded in the

[^1]: 9-1305





**[p. 232]**

"When, early in 1849, the Federal police deemed it politically expedient to persecute me for organising a Sicilian legion, I went to Geneva where Fazy told me that I could organise to my heart's content and had no need to concern myself about the Federal Council. I am well aware that M. Fazy will instantly sacrifice anyone as soon as things take a bad turn for the person concerned, even if the law is on that person's side, and I have later experienced this myself in an incident which is too complicated to explain in a letter but to the facts of which the Federal Commissars Dr. Kern and Trog can testify.

"As far as the refugees were concerned, he used the watchword of humanity to resist the measures of the Federal Council and with callous arbitrariness persecuted refugees who were in his bad books. Above all, outstanding people close to Galeer, in whom he suspected a future rival, were subjected to ruthless persecution. Mazzini had good cause to fear him more than the Federal police. The tall Heinzen was abhorrent to him and had to leave the Canton almost at once. 'He thumps around as if the ground belonged to him', was the only explanation Fazy naively offered. Struve was arrested while out walking with his wife, even though there had been no instructions from the Federal Council, and was pushed over the frontier to the Canton of Vaud on the grounds that he was a Russian spy. Galeer managed to get to Fazy in time and tried to rectify this error. The two became embroiled in loud discussions since Fazy believes he is more convincing the more he shouts and the more indignant he pretends to be. Struve had to remain a Russian spy. If I remember rightlv this scene took place in the Hôtel des Bergues in the presence of Mr. Herzen, the Russian refugee with whom the head of the Geneva Government liked to dine. However, this gentleman certainly had no part in the sordid accusations brought against Struve. Fazy is undoubtedly a greater Russophile than Struve, for I once heard him say in a speech at some celebration: 'The works of Jean Jacques Rousseau are more read and better understood in Russia than in Germany.' It is true that his principal intention here was to snipe at Galeer's German friends and the Germans in general.

"Galeer, who up till then had gone along with Fazy through thick and thin on political matters and whom I spoke to just after he had crossed swords with Fazy on Struve's account, told me sadly: 'I am through with Fazy now. As a matter of honour I can no longer associate with him. The man is a veritable monster politically, a mere animal in his desires. If I were to remain in league with him this would mean helping to destroy the cause of the people from within. Only if he is confronted by a truly liberal party, will he be compelled to uphold the banner of radicalism to save his position. As long as he is opposed only bv the old aristocracy things will only get worse, since he has long been flirting with the ultramontane party and can really do what he iikes. Moreover, he is no true Swiss in his attitudes



**[p. 233]**

"All the people with independent minds and especially the members of the young school of political economy gathered round Galeer, and the committed radical and socialist elements thus 'united' soon became known as the democratic party. Henceforth radicalism, with few exceptions, consisted solely in conscious or unconscious servility towards Fazy, who had now found, in the Catholic districts of Savoy united with Geneva after 1815, a lever by which to control the majority. The ultramontane priests, all-powerful in that region, now entered into an alliance with 'radicalism', which was the upshot of Fazy's activity. Galeer was subjected to the basest sort of calumny, persecuted and was finally removed from his post. The young democratic party now found itself caught between the party of the aristocrats on the one hand and the party of the united old radicals and the ultramontanists on the other, and was as yet unable to put up its own independent list at the approaching elections. And although M. James Fazy refused to include the names of some of the democrats in his own list, Galeer and his friends, scorning the offers of the aristocratic party, resolved to give their votes this time to Fazy, looking for victory to the future. So if Fazy had been sincere in what he said about progress and a radically bourgeois development he would have had no need to attach himself to the filthy wing of the eternally backward-looking ultramontan- ists. In order to prosecute the malicious attacks and accusations against Galeer with greater effect the satellites of His Excellency, the 'radical' President, founded a special abusive paper to relieve that astute lord and master of the necessity of befouling his own Moniteur, the Revue de Genève, with his invective, more and more of which now appeared in the paper of his whipping-boys, whom he could disown at will. Galeer, whose health was weak, succumbed to this dastardly campaign and died in the course of the same year (1851) when he was still no more than thirty-five years of age. How often did I not hear it said in Geneva: 'Our good, noble Galeer -was the victim of the inexorable revenge of our Jesuitical tyrant. ' In the following elections Galeer's friends entered into the alliance offered by the aristocratic party, and they did so all the more willingly since the latter declared themselves content with the fall of Fazy and with a very modest share in the government. Galeer, who always remained true to his principles, would probably have rejected this alliance even now, but, as the members of his party said, to what end has M. Fazy given us the fine example of his alliance with the ultramontane party, why should we be ashamed of joining up with the decent wing of the aristocratic party when Fazy does not blush to be associated with the indecent wing of the ultramontanists? Can we not progress at least as far with the cultured aristocracy as M. Fazy claims to with the ignorant ultramontanists?

"When it came to the elections, then (I believe they took place in November 1853) many radicals and even a number of Fazy's ministerial colleagues went over to the democrats, so that the hero of 1846 was unseated from his presidential chair by a great majority. The ex-President, who had run up lots of debts, now found himself in an extremely embarrassing situation. In this context I must digress to reveal a number of characteristic facts about his life.

"Even before entering the government M. James Fazy had run through a substantial inheritance in fine style. Up to his ears in debts and mercilessly pursued by his creditors, he sought as soon as he had arrived at the presidential chair quickly to abolish the practice of arresting debtors. Of course, he was acting 'in the

[^1]: 9*





**[p. 234]**

"In the beginning of the fifties, however, M. Fazy found himself in sore straits materially, so that a 'grateful people' had to come to his rescue and make him a present of a large building site that had become available with the razing of the fortifications. And why not indeed? Since he had been instrumental in cleaning this area of the fortifications, why should he not 'annex' a portion of it, especially as greater potentates than he do not disdain to do things of that sort. M. Fazy was now able to sell many large building sites and build a big beautiful house for himself. Unfortunately, he soon incurred new debts and could not pay the wages of his builders. Early in 1855 he was forced to endure being shouted at on the street by a master carpenter to whom he owed a few thousand francs: 'Pay me, you rogue, so that I can buy bread for my children.' It was in these circumstances that the hard-pressed man became an ex-President, and, to crown it all, he found himself in an even more painfully embarrassing situation. What happened was that the Caisse d'Escompte, a radical bank, was forced to suspend payments. Fazy's friends in the bank, themselves overburdened with debts, had advanced credit to him and to each other far beyond what was permitted in the statutes and was actually at the disposal of the bank. The director, who is in jail to this day, had been even less restrained—bad examples ruin good habits — in advancing credit to himself. Thus the Caisse d'Escompte found itself on the brink of a grave emergency: bankruptcy. The savings of a hundred thrifty workers' families were in jeopardy. Good counsel and, even more urgently, action were needed, cost what it might, otherwise Fazism would have been swept away by the deficit like chaff in the wind. Naturally enough in the circumstances, there could be no question of raising money for the Caisse d'Escompte directly. However, at that time there was another bank in Geneva labouring to establish itself, the Banque Générale Suisse. A considerable amount of capital had to be procured for this bank so that in return it would rescue the Caisse d'Escompte from its financial ebb and M. Fazy from the flood of debts. Fazy had to act as rescuer in order to be rescued himself. In case of success he was guaranteed a substantial commission expressed in so and so many per cent and the Caisse d'Escompte the badly needed additional capital. So on behalf of the Banque Générale Suisse and also pro domo,a M. Fazy went to Paris where, after a sojourn lasting several weeks and, as rumour would have it, thanks to the gracious assistance of 'His Majesty'}* he succeeded in persuading the Crédit Mobilier to provide millions of francs towards the rescue operation. At around the same time (November 1855) the preparations for the new elections were being made and the sauveurc therefore sent letters home to Geneva in advance, announcing that he would presently arrive bearing in person his cargo of millions. This was a healing plaster for the stricken hearts of the shareholders of the Caisse d'Escompte, and a magic wand for the ultramontane-radical voters. At that time a good likeness of him appeared in a caricature showing him as a gigantic swan entering the harbour of Geneva weighed down with sacks of gold. A joker told me at the time that according to the story he had heard over a beer Fazy had brought back 50 million, over a glass of wine the sum rose to 100 million and when the absinthe was reached it had become 200 million. In the eyes of his children, the reputation of Papa Fazy's miraculous powers was fully restored. The democrats,

[^1]: a For his own benefit.— Ed. b Napoleon III.— Ed. c Saviour.— Ed.



"This time, however, it soon became perfectly clear that the ultramontane faction had not lent their massive support for nothing, but that they were determined to have their share of the rewards of victory. M. Marilley, the Bishop of Fribourg, an eternal agitator and trouble-maker who had been driven out of Switzerland as a result of the Sonderbund War, left France and reappeared in Geneva one fine day with the official permission of M. Fazy. Once in Geneva he began to celebrate 'Holy' Mass once again. The entire city reverberated with anger, and popular fury soon echoed throughout Switzerland. It was too much even for the blindest radicals, the most subservient fruitiers. A popular assembly was convened without delay and the head of the government was presented with a vote of no-confidence. His colleague, Councillor Tourte, although himself merely a disciple and pupil of Fazy, suddenly displayed a very dubious desire for independence and he thundered away at his lord and master without any scruples whatever. However, M. Fazy had taken good care to absent himself from the country before the arrival of the Lord Bishop, just as he always did leaving his colleagues to drink what he had brewed. M. de Marilley, of course, had to leave the city and the country without more ado. Papa Fazy however wrote from Berne giving his unruly children a dressing down and asserting that he had been the victim of a misunderstanding, the government had not handled the affair correctly, he had merely acted in the 'interest of freedom of religion' and had simply permitted the Bishop to make a visit. After the storm had abated a much wronged Papa Fazy returned to Geneva. It was now all the simpler to re-establish his injured authority and restore faith in his pure love of freedom and of his country, by the simple device of uttering a few oracular statements which ring very true and fit any situation, because his colleagues were decent enough to shoulder the main responsibility. But Fazy had thus achieved the satisfactory end of demonstrating to his friends of the ultramontane faction that he was always prepared to do for them—whatever lay in his power. For a number of years now M. James Fazy has been a very wealthy man. Not only is the Banque Générale Suisse said to have guaranteed him a certain percentage for the duration of his life, but he has also, as head of the government, revealed great understanding of his own interests in such matters as the development of railways in his own Canton, etc. In his large and beautiful mansion (the Hôtel Fazy on the Quai du Mont Blanc) the beau monde moves among the cercle des étrangers.3 And ever since Piedmont found the 'gambling dens' of the Savoy spas incompatible with its political morality, the compassionate President of the Republic of Geneva has touchingly offered such a den asylum in his roomy dwelling. Long live freedom! Laissez aller et laissez faire! Allez chez moi et faites votre jeu!b

Your Johann Philipp Becker"

c From Heinrich Heine's cycle of poems, "Die Heimkehr", No. 64, Buch der Lieder, Erster Teil.— Ed.

[^1]: "Darling, what more can you desire?c

[^2]: a Circle of foreigners.— Ed. b Let people do as they think best. Come to my place and make your stake.— Ed.





**[p. 236]**

Peace and goodwill to this fair meeting, I come not with hostility, but greeting.3

At the head of the procession, from which I intend only to single out a few of the more striking figures, we encounter the Berlin National-Zeitung, under the command of Herr F. Zabel. A comparison between the review of the "Magnum Opus" which appeared at Vogt's prompting in the Revue contemporaine from the pen of M. Edouard Simonb and the corresponding articles in the National-Zeitung, Breslauer Zeitung, etc., almost leads one to the conclusion that the "well-rounded character" issued two pro- grammes, one dealing with the Italian campaign, the other with the Augsburg campaign. What on earth could have induced Herr F. Zabel, that fat and tedious bore of the National-Zeitung, who is usually so cautious, to kick over the traces and translate Vogt's street-songs into leading articles?

The first detailed reference to the National-Zeitung appeared in No. 205 of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on January 26, 1849, in a leading article beginning with the words "Signpost to Schilda".202

However, the arms of this signpost are too long to reprint them here. In a leading article of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 224 of February 17, 1849, it is stated:

"The Berlin National-Zeitung represents triviality portentously expressed. Some recent samples. They are taken from its discussion of the Prussian circular note Althoughs and buts! Can and may and seem! Consider and wish that the Prussian Government may wish! Like the inmate of a bagnio each phrase has a hundredweight tied 10 it, and is therefore weighty. Each 'if, each 'although', each 'but' is a real Dr. utriusque juris S And if you take all that Christian-Germanic padding, all those cotton rags in which the National-Zeitung has solicitously enveloped its wisdom and unwrap them just as carefully, what remains? Political hot air, in black and white, Berlin leading articles en grande tenued The National-Zeitung is obviously written for the thinking reader, just like Rotteck's Weltgeschichte-0* The French have an apt formula for thought of this kind which is active purely at a linguistic level. 'Je n'aime pas les épinards et j'en suis bien aise; car si je les aimais, j'en mangerais beaucoup, et je ne peux pas les souffrir.' 'I do not like spinach and that is a good thing; for if I liked it I would not be able to eat enough of it and I can't stand it.' The National-Zeitung has Prussia's happiness at heart and so it wants—another Ministry. What it wants in any case is—a Ministry. And this is the only thing which the patrons of the National-Zeitung are definite and self-confident about."

a Marx quotes the verses in English and gives the German translation in a footnote.— Ed.

h Edouard Simon, "Un tableau de moeurs politiques en Allemagne", Revue contemporaine, t. 13, Paris, 1860.— Ed.

[^1]: c Doctor of both laws (civil and canon).— Ed. d In full dress.— Ed.





**[p. 237]**

"Berlin, May 9, 1849 It is interesting to observe the attitude of the Berlin press towards the Saxon revolution. The 'National-Zeitung' knows only one emotion: the fear of being banned"

But fear is an elixir of life, as the National-Zeitung has demonstrated throughout the decade of Manteuffel's rule. The National-Zeitung has proved the truth of Pope's dictum:

Still her old empire to restore she tries, For, born a goddess, Dullness never dies.*204

The only thing that distinguishes Pope's realm of Dullness from that of the National-Zeitung is that in the former "nowb Dunce the second reigns like Dunce the first", whereas in the latter, the old dunce, Dunce the first,c still holds sway.

The Breslauer Zeitung, which follows hard on the heels of the National-Zeitung, is now in raptures about the Hohenzollern Ministry as it had been about the Manteuffel Ministry before it. Early in 1860 I received the following letterd:

"Breslau, February 27, 1860 "Dear Marx,

"I saw in the Volks-Zeitung your address and your declaration against the National-Zeitung.e An article similar to that in the National-Zeitung appeared also in the Breslauer Zeitung from the pen of its daily contributor, Dr. Stein. This is the same Dr. Stein who used to sit with D'Ester on the extreme left of the Berlin National Assembly and who proposed the famous motion against the officers of the Prussian army. This great Stein with the diminutive body was suspended from his post as teacher. When the new Ministry was installed he set himself the task of agitating on its behalf, not just in the past year, in preparation for the elections, but even now, to bring about a merger of the Silesian democrats and the constitutionalists. Despite this his application to the present Ministry for permission to give private lessons has been refused, not just once but over and over again. The previous Ministry had tacitly allowed him to teach, while the present one prohibits him from doing so on the grounds that it is unlawful. He has now gone to Berlin to obtain permission there but without success, as you can see elsewhere in the

* It is impossible to find a German equivalent for Dullness. It is more than boredom, it is ennui elevated into a principle, soporific lifelessness, blunted stupor. As a quality of style Dullness is what the Neue Rheinische Zeitung called "triviality portentously expressed". [Marx quotes the two lines from Alexander Pope in English and gives the German translation at the beginning of this footnote.]

a Of May 12, 1849.— Ed. b Pope has "still".— Ed. c Marx uses the English phrase "Dunce the first".— Ed. d An entry in Marx's notebook says the letter was written by Peter Nothjung.— Ed.

e See this volume, pp. 12-13.— Ed.



**[p. 238]**

What should I say about my colleague Stein, for in fact, Stein was my colleague, since I was for a full six months, in 1855, a correspondent of the Neue Oder-Zeitung205 and this was the only German paper for which I wrote while I was abroad. Clearly, Stein is a man with a stony [steinern] heart and even the refusal to allow him to give private lessons could not soften him. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung hammered away at Stein a great deal in order to knock him into shape. Thus in No. 225, for example:

"Cologne, February 16, 1849 As for Herr Stein himself, we recall the time when he attacked the republicans on fanatically constitutional grounds, when in the Schlesische Zeitung he roundly denounced the representatives of the working class and had them denounced by a schoolteacher whose ideas were akin to his own and who is now a member of the 'Association for Law and Order'. Just as pitiful as the Agreers Assembly itself was the so-called democratic group of this Assembly. It could be foreseen that these gentlemen, in order to be re-elected, would now recognise the imposed Constitution. It is even more characteristic of the standpoint of these gentlemen that after the elections they are disavowing in the democratic clubs what before the elections they assented to at meetings of the electors. This petty, crafty liberal slyness was never the diplomacy of revolutionaries."206

The [Neue] Rheinische Zeitung had not sculptured this stone [Stein] in vain, as he demonstrated as soon as Manteuffel had dictated the dictated Chamber out of existence once again, for Dr. Julius Stein then proclaimed in the "chief democratic club in

Breslau":

"We" (the extreme Berlin Left) "have regarded the German question as a lost cause from the outset People must now realise that no united Germany is possible as there are still German Princes" (Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 290).

It is indeed a heart-rending sight, it is enough to melt a stone, to see how Schwerin time and time again rejects this same Stein, even though he is no longer a stumbling-block [Stein des Anstosses], and refuses to use him—as a building stone [Baustein].3

I do not know if my readers have ever themselves seen a copy

[^1]: a Cf. Psalms 118:22, Matthew 21:42 and Luke 20:17.— Ed.





**[p. 239]**

a Here and below Marx uses the English term.— Ed. b Cf. Virgil, Georgies, Book IV, 176.— Ed. c William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed.



**[p. 240]**

Der Freischütz, No. 17:

"The paper" (Allgemeine Zeitung) " has now been found guilty also of having made use of the assistance of a revolutionary party which Vogt has stigmatised as the Brimstone Gang of the German republicans."

When and where has Vogt prated about the Brimstone Gang of the German republicans?

Der Freischütz, No. 18:

"It is Liebknecht who has launched an attack on Vogt in the Allgemeine Zeitung}* by repeating there the accusations made by Biscamp in the London Volk. However, the accusations did not develop their full force until Marx sent to the offices of the Allgemeine Zeitung a pamphlet that had appeared in London and which he attributed to Blind."

Vogt was able to tell many lies but even his lawyer, Hermann, forbade him the lie that the article by Biscamp, which had not been reprinted in the Allgemeine Zeitung, was "repeated" there by Liebknecht. Nor has Vogt ever thought of maintaining that it was I who sent the pamphlet Zur Warnung to the Allgemeine Zeitung. On the contrary, he says quite explicitly: "It was Herr Liebknecht

 who sent the libellous pamphlet to the Allgemeine Zeitung" ("Magnum Opus" p. 167).

Der Freischütz, No. 19:

"Blind positively denied that he was the pamphlet's author, and the printer certified that it was not given to him to print by Blind. What is however certain is that

a This refers to Eduard Meyen's article "Carl Vogts Kampf gegen die Augsburger Allgem. Zeitung und die Marxianer" published in Der Freischütz in February 1860.— Ed.

b Wilhelm Liebknecht [An die Redaction der Allgemeinen Zeitung, Augsburg], Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 300, October 27, 1859.— Ed.



**[p. 241]**

In his "Magnum Opus" Vogt on the one hand prints Fidelio Hollinger's declaration asserting that the pamphlet had not been set in his print-shop,a and, on the other, my counter-declaration that the original type of the lampoon was still standing at Hollinger's when it was reprinted in Das Volkh What chaos did our unfortunate Toby make out of this!

Der Freischütz, No. 19:

"As far as the people themselves are concerned" (Engels and I are supposed to say in Techow's letter) "they are pure rationalists who have no patience with nationality."

No sentimentality, my dear Toby; no sentimentality, writes Techow, according to Vogt. Der Freischütz, No. 20:

"Marx did not prevent the duellists from going to Ostend to fight a pistol duel. Techow acted as Willich's second, etc. After this incident [] Techow broke off relations with Marx and his League."

Eduard Meyen is not content to substitute Ostend for Antwerp. He had probably heard about the Frenchman in the West End of London complaining that the English write "London" and pronounce it "Constantinople". Techow, who had only met me once in his life at the time of his correspondence and who moreover writes explicitly that he had at first intended to join me and my League, is made by Eduard Meyen to break off relations with me and my League, of which he was never a member.

Der Freischütz, No. 21 :

"This incident" (the Joint Workers' Festival in Lausanne) "explains the violent • attack on Vogt which was made in Das Volk in London."

In the "Magnum Opus" Vogt himself gives the date of the "violent attack" on him in Das Volk—May 14, 1859.c (The pamphlet appeared in Das Volk on June 18, 1859.) However, the Lausanne Joint Festival took place on June 26 and 27, 1859, i.e. long after the "violent attack" which according to Meyen it provoked.

But we have quoted enough of Toby's reading. It is not surprising that Toby having managed to read all sorts of things in

a Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, Dokumente, S. 38.— Ed. b ibid., S. 39-40. See also this volume, pp. 8-9.— Ed. c ibid., S. \7.— Ed.



**[p. 242]**

"Vogt's book will take its rightful place among the boldest, wittiest and most useful polemics in our literature" (Der Freischütz, No. 17).

Just think of this wretched Toby, incapable as he is of even copying out two lines of a printed book correctly, just think of him condemned to sit in Wandsbek, having to decipher the book of world history209 every day, straining to read a record of events barely hinted at in the obscurest of scripts, copying away by the hour and having to produce life-size photographs of the dissolving views3 of the present in the columns of Der Freischütz] Unhappy Wandsbek Messenger!b Happy Hamburg reader of Der Freischütz]

A few days ago the London Times published a strange news item which went through the entire English press and bore the title: "A Man Shot by a Dog." It seems therefore that Toby knows how to use a gun and thus it is not surprising to find Eduard Meyen sing in Der Freischütz: "A marksman am I in the pay of the Regent."0

The Kölnische Zeitung confined itself to a few malicious little paragraphs and insinuations in favour of Vogt. A week after the "Magnum Opus" had appeared it spread the fairy-tale in its columns that it was already out-of-print, probably so as not to have to lay violent hands upon it. But what an irony of history!

If only I had been able to foresee in 1848-49, at the time of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, when we had daily to cross swords with our Cologne neighbour for the Poles, Hungarians and Italians, that this very same Kölnische Zeitung would in 1859 become the chivalrous protagonist of the principle of nationality, and that the simple Herr Jusepp Dumont would emerge from his chrysalis as Signor Giuseppe Del Monte! But of course at that time no Louis Bonaparte had as yet given the nationalities the superior blessing of morality and liberalism, and the Kölnische Zeitung will always remember that Louis Bonaparte has saved society. The red fury with which it attacked Austria at the time can be seen from the

Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 144d:

"Cologne, November 15 (1848). At a moment when the whole of Germany cries out in indignation because the blood-stained minion of the Austrian bandit, because a Windischgrätz could dare to have the deputy Robert Blum shot down

a Marx uses the English phrase "dissolving views".— Ed. b Marx here puns on Wandsbeker Bote—Wandsbek Messenger, a celebrated paper published by the poet Matthias Claudius from 1770 to 1775.— Ed.

c See B. von Braunthal, Das Nachtlager in Granada.—Ed. d This refers to the item "Köln, 15. November" in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of November 16, 1848. Marx quotes from his notebook.— Ed.



**[p. 243]**

By means of an ingenious system of concealed plumbing, all the lavatories of London empty their physical refuse into the Thames. In the same way every day the capital of the world spews out all its social refuse through a system of goose quills, and it pours out into a great central paper cloaca—the Daily Telegraph. Liebig rightly criticises the senseless wastefulness which robs the Thames of its purity and the English soil of its manure.b L e v y , however, the proprietor of this central paper cloaca, is an expert not only in chemistry, but even in alchemy. Having transformed the social refuse of London into newspaper articles, he transforms the newspaper articles into copper, and finally the copper into gold. At the entrance which leads to the central paper cloaca, the following words are written di colore oscuro: "hie quisquam faxit oletum Vc or as Byron translated it so poetically "Wanderer, stop and—piss!"d

Levy, like Habakkuk, est capable de tout.e He is capable of printing a leading article three columns long on a single case of rape. Earlier this year he treated his numerous public of gourmets to an

a Roughly = fool's paradise, a pun on Valhalla.— Ed. b Justus von Liebig, Die Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physiologie, Braunschweig, 1840, S. 216.— Ed.

c In sombre colours: "Here it is permitted to make bad odours!" The Latin words are a paraphrased line from Persius, Satires, Book I, First Satire.— Ed.

[^1]: d Byron, "Epitaph".— Ed. e Is capable of everything.— Ed.





**[p. 244]**

Politicians refer to the Daily Telegraph as "Palmerston's mobpaper", but Levy's refuse barge only carries politics as ballast. The Saturday Review aptly described his penny-rag as "cheap and nasty".

"It is a fatal symptom," it says inter alia, "that it should have given such a definite preference for dirt to cleanliness. In every case it will exclude the most important report in order to leave space for a disreputable article."

Nevertheless, Levy also has a prudery of his own. He criticises immorality in the theatre, for instance, and like a second Cato the Censor, he pursues the dress of the ballet dancers, which according to him starts too late and ends too soon. Such fits of virtue only take Levy out of the frying-pan into the fire. O Logic! a London theatrical journal, The Players, exclaims, O Logic! where is thy blush? How the roguec must have laughed in his sleeve! The Telegraph as guardian of the decency of female costume on the stage! Holy Jupiter, what will happen next? Earthquakes and fiery comets are the least that can be expected now. Decency! "I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word."d And as Hamlet

c Marx gives the English word in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. d Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, Act IV, Scene 1. In Marx's original the English sentence is followed by its German equivalent in brackets.— Ed.

[^1]: a Of the strong-box, i.e. of the rich.— Ed. b Here and below Marx uses English: "Commit no Nuisance", "Commit Levy", "mobpaper", "cheap and nasty".— Ed.





**[p. 245]**

"multum gaudere paratus, Si Cynico" (the cynic Levy) "barbam petulans nonaria vellat".c

The Weekly Mail maintains that although Levy really fools no one,d he has changed "i" into "y", and it is true that among the 22,000 Lévites211 whom Moses counted in the journey through the wilderness, there was not a single Levi who spelled his name with«a "y". Just as Edouard Simon spares no effort to be regarded as belonging to the Romance people, so Levy is determined to be an Anglo-Saxon. Therefore, at least once a month he attacks the un-English policies of Mr. Disraeli, for Disraeli, "the Asiatic mystery",6 is, unlike the Telegraph, not an Anglo-Saxon by descent. But what does it profit Levy to attack Mr. D'Israeli and to change "i" into "y", when Mother Nature has inscribed his origins in the clearest possible way right in the middle of his face. The nose of the mysterious stranger of Slawkenbergius (see Tristram Shandy) who had got the finest nose from the promontory of nosesf was just a nine days' wonder in Strasbourg^ whereas Levy's nose provides conversation throughout the year in the City of London. A Greek epigrammatist describes the nose of a certain Castor which could be used for all sorts of things: as a shovel, a trumpet, a sickle, an anchor, etc. He concludes his description with the words:

* Thus was Castor equipped with a tool that was truly amazing, Owning a nose that served almost every conceivable purpose." [Anonymous epigram from Anthologia Graeca, XI, 203, Verses 7 and 8.]

a Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act III, Scene 1.— Ed. b Harlot.— Ed. c "always ready to be delighted, Should the harlot playfully tug at the beard of the Cynic" (Persius, Satires, Book I, First Satire).— Ed. d Marx puns on the idiom "ein X für ein U vormachen" (to put an X in place of a U) which means to try to fool someone.— Ed.

e Marx gives the English phrase in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. f Marx uses English: "finest nose" and "promontory of noses".— Ed. g Cf. Laurence Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, Vol. IV, Slawkenbergius.— Ed.

[^1]: "OUTWS ei&x?'in CTTOV crxevovc Kcxcrrcop Terùx T|xe, 'Pîva cpépwv nàcnrçç äp(XEPOV èp-yacria«;" *





**[p. 246]**

"And 'tis a miracle we may suppose, No nastiness offends his skilful nose."a

Indeed the great skill of Levy's nose consists in its ability to titillate with a rotten smell, to sniff it out a hundred miles away and to attract it. Thus Levy's nose serves the Daily Telegraph as elephant's trunk, antenna, lighthouse and telegraph. It is therefore no exaggeration to say that Levy writes his paper with his nose.

The clean-minded Daily Telegraph was of course the only English paper in which Vogt's Lousiad, not only could, but had to be printed. In Levy's organ an article two-and-a-half columns long appeared on February 6, 1860, with the title: "The Journalistic Auxiliaries of Austria",b which was in fact a mere translation into malodorous English of the two leading articles from the Berlin National-Zeitung. To lead the reader astray, the article bore the superscription: "From an occasional correspondent, Frankfort on the Main, February 2."c I knew of course that the only correspondent of the Telegraph was based in Berlin where Levy's nose had sniffed him out with its customary virtuosity. I therefore wrote at once to a friend in Berlin asking him to see if he could discover the name of Levy's correspondent.212 My friend, a man whose learning has been acknowledged even by Alexander von Humboldt, was obdurate enough to insist that there was no Daily Telegraph in London and consequently no correspondent belong- ing to it in Berlin. I therefore turned to another acquaintance in the City on the Spree. Reply: the Berlin correspondent of the Daily Telegraph exists and is called—Abel. I thought this might well conceal a gross mystification. Abel was obviously just an abbreviation of Zabel. Nor was I led astray by the fact that Zabel cannot write English. If Abel can edit the National-Zeitung as Zabel without knowing any German, why should not Zabel be able to contribute to the Telegraph as Abel without knowing any English. So Zabel, Abel, Abel, Zabel? Hov/ to find a way out of this Babel? I examined the Berlin organ of wisdom once again, comparing it with Levy's, and this time I discovered the following passage in No. 41 of the National-Zeitung:

c Marx gives the words of the superscription in English and supplies the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

[^1]: a Marx quotes in English and gives the German translation in a footnote.— Ed. b Marx gives the title in English and supplies the German translation in brackets.— Ed.





**[p. 247]**

This passage about the magistrate and Zabel's astonished question mark after the word "magistrate" puts one in mind of the Swabian who "as soon as he got off the ship in Asia asked: 'Isn't there some good fellow from Bebbingen here?'" Levy's paper omits not only the entire passage, but even the question mark, which proves conclusively that Levy's correspondent does not share F. Zabel's belief that London police-court judges or magistrates3 are the same thing as the Berlin Magistrat2™ Hence Zabel was not Abel and Abel was not Zabel. In the meantime, however, other acquaintances in Berlin had heard of my difficulties. One of them wrote: "Among the 22,000 Lévites in Numbers there is an Abel, but it is spelt Abigail." Another wrote: "On this occasion it is Abel who killed Cain, not Cain who killed Abel." In this way I went deeper and deeper into the maze until, finally, the editor of a London newspaper assured me with the dry earnestness of the English that Abel was not a joke, but a Jewish- born man of letters in Berlin whose full name was Dr. Karl Abel. This noble youth had served for a considerable time under Stahl and Gerlach as a zealous drudge for the Kreuz-Zeitung, but with the change of Ministry he had changed, if not his skin, at least his colours. The over-eager zeal of the renegade would indeed explain why Levy's Berlin correspondent imagines that the freedom of the press in England has been specially designed to allow him to peddle his compulsive admiration of the Hohenzol- lern Ministry. Hypothetically, then, we may assume that there is an Abel in Berlin as well as a Levy in London — par nobile fratrum.b

Abel supplies his Levy simultaneously from everywhere under the sun: from Berlin, Vienna, Frankfurt am Main, Stockholm, Petersburg, Hong Kong, etc.,— a much greater achievement than De Maistre's Voyage autour de ma chambre. But whatever address Abel chooses when he writes to his Levy, his dominant sign of the Zodiac remains constant: Cancer. In contrast to the procession in Echternach where those taking part move two steps forward and one step back,214 Abel's articles take one step forward and two steps back.

"No crab more active in the dirty dance, Downward to climb, and backward to advance." (Pope)'

a Marx gives the English term in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. h A noble pair of brothers (Horace, Satires, Book II, Satire 3).— Ed. c Alexander Pope, The Dunnad, Book II. Marx quotes in English and gives the German translation in a footnote.— Ed.



**[p. 248]**

As to Abel's style, we can give the reader an idea of what it is like by saying that it is a poor imitation of the styles of Stern Gescheidt, Isidor Berlinerblau and Jacob Wiesenriesler.

With Abel's permission we shall make a digression at this point. The original Stern Gescheidt is another accomplice of Vogt. He is a certain L. Bamberger who in 1848 was the editor of a provincial rag in Mainzb and is at present a loup-garouc married "on full pay" in Paris and a Decembrist democrat "in the simplest meaning of the word". To grasp the significance of this "simple" meaning, it is necessary to be acquainted with the jargon of the Paris Stock Exchange synagogue. Stern Gescheidt's "simple" democracy is identical with what Isaac Péreire calls "la démocratisation du crédit",

1 This phrase and, below, the expressions "I owe it to myself" and "I must warn your readers" are in English in the original. The German equivalents are given in brackets.— Ed.

b The Mainzer Zeitung.—Ed. c Werewolf.— Ed.



**[p. 249]**

olet* adding with Stern Gescheidt Bamberger: "It's the quantity that does it." This is Stern Gescheidt's democracy in its extreme "simplicity". More recently, Stern Gescheidt Bamberger has come to be known under the name of "Hurrah, on to Italy!"c In contrast to that, during the campaign for the Imperial Constitution he answered to the name of "Ouch, away from Kirchheimboland!" I have in my possession a priceless manuscript describing the heroic deeds of Stern Gescheidt Bamberger, who absconded from Kirchheimboland and led the volunteer corps of the Rhine- Palatinate by the nose. He was much too smartd not to have sensed that the bloated, blood-streaked soil of December was gold-bearing for smart treasure-seekers. So he went to Paris where, as his friend Isidor Berlinerblau alias H. B. Oppenheim puts it so aptly, "one feels freer than one knows". Stern Gescheidt, whose "circulation was coming to a standstill" in 1858 (see the declaration of the Banque de France on circulation in 1858-59e), was overjoyed when he suddenly saw the dirty soil of December glistening with the bright colours of high-faluting ideas. Stern Gescheidt, as smart as he is brightly democratic, realised that if Paris had a flood which were to wash over the soil of December, it would sweep away the Credit in his ledger, while leaving the Debit behind. It is common knowledge that Stern Gescheidt Bamberger has added a tenth, Hebrew, muse to the nine Greek ones: it is "the muse of time", as he calls the Stock Exchange list.

But to return to Abel. Abel's style is saturated with the odor specificus inseparable from the Daily Telegraph, the paper cloaca of

c An allusion to Ludwig Bamberger's book Juchhe nach Italia! published anonymously in Berne and Geneva in 1859.— Ed.

d Marx uses the word gescheit, punning on the name Gescheidt. On Bamberger's part in the events of 1849 see Engels' The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution (present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 196 and 224).— Ed.

<• "The Bank of France", The Times, No. 23203, January 14, 1859.— Ed.

[^1]: a Marx writes "fish" in the original.— Ed. b It doesn't smell (these words are usually attributed to Emperor Vespasian who introduced a tax on public lavatories).— Ed.





**[p. 250]**

Poetic justice demands that at the end of the comedy the "well-rounded character" should not get stuck together with Abel in the London muck, but who is to pull him out of it? Who is to be his saviour? A mudlark is to be his saviour, namely Baron von Vincke,b a squire of the red earth,c a knight of the joyful countenance, chevalier sans peur et sans reproche.216

As already mentioned, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung as early as 1848 revealed the identity of the opposites Vogt and Vincke,d and Vogt himself had a presentiment of this identity as early as 1859 when he wrote in his Studien:

"Herr von Vincke as the apostle of a new political freedom really verges on the realm of the ridiculous" (loc. cit., p. 21),

i.e. Vogt's own realm. However, on March 1, 1860 Vincke publicly extended the hand of friendship in a speech in which, as Johann Philipp Becker expressed it, he "used the Brimstone Gang as an illustration of the modest Prussian Chamber". Hardly a year had passed since he had recommended to that same house the pamphlet Po and Rhinee whose sulphurous origins he had of course been unable to detect, since he lacked Levy's nose. When moreover Vincke began to play the Italian just like Vogt, when Vincke, like Vogt, insulted the Poles and when Vincke, like Vogt, proclaimed the partition of Germany, the feuding brothers fell into each other's arms for ever.

It is well known that like poles are bound to repel each other. So for a long time Vogt and Vincke repelled each other. Both men drivel too much so that each imagined that the other wished to prevent him from speaking.

Vogt is a great zoologist, as Ranickel testifies, and so is Vincke, as is demonstrated by his pig-farm at Ickern.

a Alexander Pope, The Dunciad, Book I. Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation and the author's name in a footnote.— Ed.

b Marx puns on the name Vincke and the word Mistfinke (mudlark, filthy fellow).— Ed.

c Westphalia.— Ed. d This refers to an item in the column "Deutschland" in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, December 29, 1848.— Ed.

[^1]: e See present edition, Vol. 16.— Ed.





**[p. 251]**

"He sometimes imagined that he was in a theatre rather than in such an assembly." b

And at a party of the Tories of the Frankfurt Parliament he made an appearance as the Prince of Fools, sat on a barrel and

217 sang :

"The Prince of Fools am I, I'll booze until I die." This too offended his counterpart. Furthermore, Vogt and Vincke could not intimidate each other so they both imagined that their best course was for each to set upon the other. Falstaff Vogt knew what to think of the knight without fear or reproach, and vice versa. The Westphalian Bayard had in his time studied law at German universities, not so much the Roman corpus juris218 for, as he said, his ancestors of the red earth had not defeated Varus for nothing. To make up for it he threw himself on Teutonic law, i.e. the students' code of behaviour, whose basis he thoroughly explored in every direction and subsequently made notorious as the legal basis.c As a result of this profound and casuistical research into the students' code of behaviour he later on, whenever faced with a duel, always found some Duns-Scotian hair which at the decisive moment interposed itself as hair-splittingly sharply between our knight and the shedding of blood as the naked sword in the bridal bed which separated the princess from the locum tenens.d From the adventure with the Supreme Court advocate Benda at the time of the United Diet of 1847219 to the no less notorious adventure with the

a Calderon, El Mdgico prodigioso.—Ed. b The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 25, June 25, 1848.— Ed. c A reference to Georg Vincke's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on June 21, 1848, in which he said "my standpoint is that of the undermined legal basis" (ibid.).— Ed.

[^1]: d Substitute.— Ed.



In the frog-pond of Frankfurt Vincke once bitterly referred to his counterpart Vogt as the "Minister of the Future"? But it really struck home when he heard in Ickern that Vogt, mindful of the maxim

"Once a position of power you've found, Ycu're lord and master the whole year round",c

had not only become Imperial Regent, but even Minister of Foreign Affairs in partibus, and he grumbled irritably that the rights of seniority had been ignored. For as early as the United Diet of 1847 Vincke as a frondeur had been against the Ministry and as a representative of the nobility against the bourgeois opposition. Hence on the outbreak of the March revolution he thought that he above all others was predestined to save the crown. But his rivals became Ministers of the Present, whereas he was appointed "Minister of the Future", a post that he has filled with unbroken success to this day.

In revenge he shook the dust of Berlin from his feet and went to St. Paul's Church in Frankfurt, where he joined the extreme Right wing, acting as a clown, claqueur and bully for General Radowitz.

Our finchd was a fanatical and zealous Austrian as long as this had the approval of the authorities. He thundered frantically against the nationalities.

"On the left they are infatuated with every conceivable nationality in turn — Italians, Poles, and now even Magyars" (session of October 23, 1848).220

The three knights Vincke, Lichnowski and Arnim played a musical trio:

a Albrecht Roon.— Ed. b Report on the session of the Frankfurt National Assembly of September 16, 1848 in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 106, September 19, 1848 in the column "Deutschland ".— Ed.

c Johann Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung, S. 76.— Ed.

d Marx puns on Fink (finch) and Vincke.— Ed.



**[p. 253]**

They performed this with such virtuosity in opposition to those who spoke in support of Poland (session of June 5, 1848)a that even the President's bell ran out of breath, and when Radowitz went so far as to put forward military and "natural" arguments in favour of incorporating the Mincio into the German Empire (session of August 12, 1848),b Vincke stood on his head and signalled his applause with his legs, to the delight of the whole gallery and the secret admiration of Vogt. As the chief claqueur for the resolutions by means of which the Frankfurt frog-pond stamped the dynastic subjugation of Poland, Hungary and Italy with the approval of the German people, the squire of the red earth shouted even more excitedly when the claims of the German nation had to be sacrificed because of the humiliating armistice of Malmö. To secure a majority for the ratification of the cease-fire, diplomatic and other observers sneaked down from the gallery and joined the Right-wing benches. The fraud was discovered and Raveaux pressed for a new vote. The finch protested that it was not a matter of who voted but of what was voted for (session of September 16, 1848).° During the September rising in Frankfurt that had been provoked by the resolution approving the Malmö armistice the Westphalian Bayard vanished without a trace, but reappeared after the state of siege had been proclaimed and avenged himself in a series of reactionary somersaults for the fright which no one could ever make up to him.

Not content with his verbal fulminations against Poles, Italians and Hungarians, he proposed that the Archduke John of Austria should be made president of the provisional central authority (session of June 21, 1848),d but he obsequiously added the rider that the Habsburg executive of the German Parliament should neither implement nor proclaim, nor in any way concern itself with the Parliament's plebeian resolutions. He even fell into a rage when, just to make a change, his colleagues in the majority voted that the Imperial Administrator should at least graciously deign to secure the previous agreement of the Parliament on matters of war and peace or the conclusion of treaties with foreign powers (session of June 27, 1848). And the extreme heat which the finch

[^1]: a The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 10, June 10, 1848.— Ed. h ibid., No. 76, August 15, 1848.— Ed. c ibid., No. 106, September 19, 1848.— Ed. d ibid.. No. 25, June 25, 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 254]**

"Oh, what cold mouths Are Westphalian mouths!"3

Thus Vincke was amiably pro-Habsburg until the Fata Morgana of Little Germany222 suddenly came into view, looming above the parliamentary Sahara, and the squire perceived a life-size minister- ial portfolio with a finch under its arm. Since the walls of St. Paul's Church had unusually long ears, he might well flatter himself that the noise he had made in Frankfurt with his outbursts about loyalty to the Hohenzollern dynasty had produced an agreeable effect in Berlin. Had he not declared before a crowded St. Paul's Church on June 21, 1848:

"I have been sent here by the electorate to defend the rights not only of the people, but also of the princes. I always comfort myself with the saying of the Great Electorb who once described the inhabitants of the Markc as his most loyal and obedient subjects. And we in the Mark are proud of it."d

And our Bayard from the Mark proceeded from phrases to fisticuffs in the celebrated parliamentary battle in which he won his spurs (sessions of August 7 and 8, 1848). What happened was that when Brentano, in the course of the debate on the proposed amnesty for Friedrich Hecker, let fall an ambiguous reference to one of the Hohenzollern princes from the rostrum, the finch had a veritable attack of loyalty rabies and rushing from his seat he hurled himself upon Herr Brentano and tried to drag him from the rostrum, shouting "Come down, you dirty dog!" Brentano was not to be dislodged. Later on the squire assaulted him a second time and threw down the gauntlet of knighthood, though naturally he reserved the right to later and more mature reflections on scruples arising from the legal basis. Brentano accepted his challenge with the words:

"Outside the church you may say whatever you wish to me; but if you do not let go of me here I shall hit you in the face."

a Johann Fischart, Affentheurliche, Naupengeheurliche Geschichtklitterung, S. 68.— Ed.

b Frederick William.— Ed. c A county in Westphalia.— Ed. d In this passage Marx summarises Vincke's speech, which was reported in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 25, June 25, 1848.— Ed.



**[p. 255]**

"Ever since Wrangel's triumphant entry into Berlin," he said, "order had reigned, stocks have risen on the Exchange The Berlin Assembly has no right to issue proclamations to the people, etc."b

The members of the Agreers Assembly had hardly been dispersed before our knight without fear or reproach fell upon them with even greater fury.

"We lack the political experience," he lamented in the session of December 12, 1848, "needed for a republic. This has been proved to us by the members of the former Berlin Assembly who approved resolutions dictated by base personal ambitions." c

He sought to appease the storm this provoked by declaring that

"he was ready to defend his words against anyone, in a chivalrous manner ", but, the cautious knight added, "he was not referring to any member of this Assembly, only the members of the dispersed Berlin Assembly".223

This was the defiant challenge that our Bayard of the Mark hurled at the entire army of dispersed Agreers. One of them heard his call, pulled himself together and succeeded in bringing about an unheard-of event: he managed to induce our squire of the red earth to venture bodily onto the battlefield at Eisenach. Bloodshed seemed inevitable when, at the decisive moment, our Bayard smelled a Duns-Scotian rat. His opponent bore the name of Georg Jung and while the laws of honour enjoined the knight without fear or reproach to do battle with dragons, they would not allow him under any circumstances to take up the cudgels with a namesake of the dragon killer.d The finch simply could not be made to give up this idée fixe. He swore by all that is holy that he would rather slit his stomach like a Japanese daimio224 than touch

a Joseph Reichardt made this remark on August 8. It was included in the report on the session published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 72, August 11, 1848.— Ed.

b Georg Vincke's speech of November 14, 1848, ibid., No. 145, November 17, 1848.— Ed.

c Georg Vincke's speech of December 12, 1848, ibid., No. 169, December 15, 1848.— Ed.

[^1]: d St. George.— Ed.





**[p. 256]**

Our Bayard from the Mark now imagined that he had heaped enough burning coals on the heads of the ingrates of March 1848. When the Ministry of Action225 fell, Vincke vanished for a time from St. Paul's Church and held himself in readiness. He did likewise on the fall of the von Pfuel Ministry. But as the mountain still failed to come to Mahomet, Mahomet resolved to go to the mountain. Having been elected in the first available rotten borough,c the knight of the red earth suddenly reappeared in Berlin as a deputy in the imposed Chamber,*1 fully expectant that the reward for his deeds in Frankfurt would now be forthcoming. Moreover, the knight felt entirely at home in the state of siege which would not deny him any unparliamentary freedom. He lapped up the hisses and jeers with which the people of Berlin greeted him as he stood with the other "imposed" deputies in front of the palace, waiting to be admitted to the White Hall, all the more eagerly as Manteuffel had dropped a delicate hint to the effect that they were inclined in the very highest places to accept the gift of the lesser German crown from the hands of the Emperor-Makers of Frankfurt if only to find a vacant ministerial portfolio in payment for a certain service. Full of such sweet dreams the finch sought to make himself useful for the time being by acting as the dirty boy of the Cabinet. He drew up a draft address to the Crown on lines laid down by the Kreuz-Zeitung,e

a Marx puns on the name Jung and the adjective jung (young).— Ed. b The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 196, January 16, 1849.— Ed. c Marx uses English: "rotten borough" and, below, "dirty boy".— Ed. d i.e. the Chamber set up under the Constitution imposed by Frederick William IV in December 1848. It was dissolved in February 1849.— Ed.

e This refers to a motion Georg Vincke tabled in the Second Chamber of the Prussian National Assembly on March 31, 1849 (see the N»ue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 262, April 3, 1849).— Ed.

The catastrophe drew nearer, the Frankfurt deputation bringing the offer of the Imperial Crown had arrived in Berlin and on April 2 (1849) Vincke put forward the most loyal amendment to the proposals about the Emperor,c an amendment for which Manteuffel voted in all innocence. As soon as the session was over Vincke rushed into a neighbouring second-hand shop where he personally purchased a portfolio, a portfolio of black card- board, with a red velvet cover edged in gold. The following day our knight of the joyous countenance sat contentedly in his seat in the middle of the Chamber, grinning like a triumphant faun—but the words he heard from Manteuffel's mocking lips were "never, never, never" 226; and the fearless squire, the colour drained from his cheeks, and quivering like an electric eel with emotion, gasped to his friends: "Hold me back, or I shall do something terrible." The Kreuz-Zeitung, whose prescriptions Vincke had been anxiously following for months and to whose proposed address of the Chamber he had stood godfather, the Kreuz-Zeitung, to hold him back, published an article on the following day with the headline "The Nation in Danger" in which it declared inter alia:

Finding himself cheated our knight sans peur et sans reproche left Berlin for Ickern with a nose longer than Levy had ever had, a nose, moreover, which simply could not have been fobbed off onto anyone except a—Minister of the Future]

Having spent many a long anxious year vegetating in the pursuit of practical zoology in Ickern, our Cincinnatus of the red earth awoke one fine day in Berlin to find himself the official

a Georg Vincke's speech of March 22, 1849, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 255, March 22, 1849.— Ed.

b A pun in the original: ausgemerzt (eradicated) puts the reader in mind of März (March) and the March revolution in Germany.— Ed.

c See the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 263, April 4, 1849.— Ed. d Frederick William IV— Ed. e "Das Vaterland ist in Gefahr!", Neue Preussische Zeitung, April 3, 1849. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung commented on this article in its issue No. 260, April 7, 1849.— Ed.

[^1]: "The Ministry remains and the King'sd answer to Herr von Vincke and his associates is that they should not involve themselves in matters which do not concern them." e



In the circumstances the finch became tired of the whole business and so he concluded his famous Treaty of Ickern. Vogt

gave it him in black and white: as soon as Plon-Plon had conquered the first parliamentarian island of Barataria3 on the German continent, and as soon as he had peopled it with Sch-Oppenheimersb and had installed his Falstaff as its Regent, Vogt would appoint the Westphalian Bayard to be his Prime Minister and confer on him the right to adjudicate in all matters concerning duelling. Furthermore, he would make him Real and Privy General Masterbuilder in charge of all the roads,* and would moreover raise him to a princely rank giving him the title of a Prince of Fools. Lastly, he would have a coin struck in the metalc that passes for money in the insular realm of Vogt and this coin would have engraved on it a pair of Siamese twins, with Vogt on the right as Plon-Plon's Regent, Vincke on the left as Vogt's Minister, and a vine-adorned inscription wound round the voluminous double-figure, stating

* See the pamphlet Auch eine Charakteristik des liberalen Abgeordneten von Vincke und erbauliche Geschichte des Sprochhövel-Elberfelder Wegbaues, Hagen, 1849.

a The island of which Sancho Panza became Governor in Don Quixote, Book II, Chap. 44.— Ed.

b A pun on the name Oppenheim and Schoppen (pint pot). Sch-Oppenheimers suggests "boozers".— Ed.

c A pun on Blech, which means both "sheet metal" and, in a figurative sense, "nonsense".— Ed.

d Adaptation of the lines: "Arm in arm with you I throw down this challenge to the age." From Schiller's Don Carlos, Act I, Scene 9.— Ed.

[^1]: "Cheek by jowl with you I throw down this challenge to the age."'1



