---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "XII. Appendices "
Page_Range: "321-355"
---

# XII. Appendices 



**[p. 296]**

XII

APPENDICES

1. SCHILY'S EXPULSION FROM SWITZERLAND

A letter from Schily about his expulsion from Switzerland which exemplifies the treatment meted out to non-pariiamentary ref- ugees234 can unfortunately only be printed in extract, owing to lack of space. The letter begins by recounting how two German refugees, B. and I.,a both friends of Schily, left Geneva, were arrested during their journey through Switzerland and, having been liberated by Druey, returned again to Geneva.

"At their request," Schily continues, "I went to Fazy to find out whether anyone was looking for them and he reassured me by saying that there was no reason at Cantonal level to disturb their incognito and that no inquiries about them had reached him at Federal level either. I would do well, however, to have an interview with the chef du département de justice et de police, M. Girard, mentioning his name and what he had told me. This Î did with more or iess the same success and leaving my address behind in case there were any Federal inquiries. A few weeks later I was visited by a police officer who requested me to give him the address of B. and I. I refused, hurried around to the aforementioned Girard and upon being threatened by him with expulsion unless I gave him the address, I explained to him that according to our previous agreement 1 couid be appealed to as an

intermédiaire, but not as a dénonciateur. To which he replied: 'Vous avez i'air de vouloir vous interposer comme ambassadeur entre moi et ces réfugiés, pour traiter de puissance à puissance.'b I replied: 'Je n'ai pas ('ambition d'être accrédité ambassadeur près de vous.'0 And in fact I was then dismissed without any of the ceremony to which ambassadors are entitled. On my way home ' learnt that B. and I. had just been discovered, and that they had been arrested and led off so that Ï could regard Girard's threat as superseded by events. But I had reckoned without April 1, for on this ominous day in 1852 1 was requested bv a police officer, ::i rhe middle of the street, to accompany him to the Hôtel de Ville, where some uuestions

c "I have no ambition to become an ambassador accredited to you."—Ed.

[^1]: a Elard Biscamp and Peter ïmandt.— Ed. b "It looks as if you would like to act the ambassador between me and these refugees, to mediate as between equal powers.''—Ed.





**[p. 297]**

latus* to Trog, his counterpart at Federal level, who happened to be in Geneva at the time, that I was expelled and that he must send me to Berne without delay; all of this to his greatest regret, since there was no complaint against me at Cantonal level, but the Federal Commissar insisted on my expulsion. To my request to be allowed to see the latter he replied: 'Non, nous ne voulons pas que le commissaire fédéral fasse la police ici.'b This statement, of course, contradicted his earlier one and in general he now abandoned his role of Genevan State Councillor, which consisted in resisting Federal demands for expulsion with liberal prudery, in yielding only to force, sometimes also yielding, with pleasure or resignation, to the application of gentle pressure.0 Another feature of this role was to noise it abroad that the person expelled was a spy and that it had been necessary to remove him in the interests of the 'good cause' Thus Tourte told the refugees afterwards that he had had to get rid of me because I was in league with the Federal Commissar, together with whom I had sought to frustrate his (Tourte's) measures to protect the refugees, i.e. that I was in league with the same Commissar who, much to his regret, had given orders to expel me. Quelles tartines!à What lies and contradictions! And all for a little aura popularise Of course, wind is what that gentleman uses to keep his balloon airborne. Grand Councillor and State Councillor of Geneva, member of the Swiss Council of States or National Council, a born Counsellor of Confusion, he needs only to become a member of the Federal Council to ensure that Switzerland will enjoy peaceful days in accordance with the saying: Providentia

Dei et confusione hominum Helvetia salva fuit."f

On arriving in London Schily sent a letter of protest about Tourte's slander to the Genevan Indépendant, which was under the influence of Raisin, whom we shall mention later, and which had shortly before printed a scathing attack on the assinine slanderous fabrications with which "the liberal faiseurs* were driving the refugees out of Switzerland". His letter was not published.

"From the Hôtel de Ville in Geneva," Schily continues, "I was transferred to gaol, and on the following day I was sent by mail coach to Berne with a police guard. There M. Druey held me in close confinement for two weeks in the so-called Old Tower"

In his correspondence with the imprisoned Schily, which we shall refer to in due course, Druey placed all the guilt on the Canton of Geneva, while for his part Tourte had asserted that the entire responsibility lay with the Federal authorities, since there was

a Assistant.— Ed. b "No, we don't want the Federal Commissar playing the policeman here."—Ed. c Marx uses English: "gentle pressure".— Ed, d What follies!— Ed. e Whiff of popularity (a phrase from Cicero's De haruspicum responso, 20, 43).— Ed. { The providence of God and the confusion of man have been the salvation of Switzerland.— Ed.

g Busybodies.— Ed.

[^1]: 11*





**[p. 298]**

"On the occasion of the Federal Shooting Competition which was held in Geneva in the summer of 1851, Raisin had taken over the editorship of the Journal du tir federal, which appeared in French and German. He engaged me to work on the paper, promising me a fee of 300 francs in exchange for which I was supposed inter alia to record flagrante delicto3 the opening and closing speeches in German of the President of the Committee Tourte. I owe a debt of gratitude to Tourte for having made my task much easier by his habit of addressing more or less the same enthusiastic words to the various deputations of marksmen, varying his phrases slightly according to whether he was eulogising the Bear of Berne, the Bull of Uri,b

or other members of the Confederation. In particular, when he would come to the refrain 'But if the moment of danger ever arrives, then we shall, etc.', I would calmly lay down my pen and when Raisin asked why, I could answer: c'est le refrain

du danger, je le sais par coeur.c Instead of my hard-earned fee of 300 francs, I managed only to extract 100 from Raisin, and only with the greatest difficulty although he did open up the prospect of collaborating on a political review he intended to establish in Geneva in order to be independent of all the existing parties and be able to oppose any side and especially the then 'liberal' government of Fazy and Tourte, even though he belonged to it himself. He was the very man for such an enterprise — able, as he used to boast, 'd'arracher la peau à qui que ce soit'd .Accordingly, he commissioned me to establish contacts for this journal in the course of a journey through Switzerland which I undertook after my Federal Shooting labours. I did so and on my return I drew up a written report on the results achieved. In the meantime, however, the wind had begun to blow from another direction and he found himself returning full sail from his expedition of piracy into the peaceful harbour of the existing government. J'en étais donc pour mes frais et honoraires,e for which I vainly pestered him and continue to do so to this day, and have still received nothing even though he is now a wealthy man Shortly before my arrest he asserted categorically that there was no question of my being expelled, his friend Tourte had himself assured him that it was not necessary for me to take any preventive measures with regard to Girard's threats, etc. In reply to a letter which I sent him de profundis,{ from my old prison tower, asking him for a small instalment of the money he owed me and for an explanation of the incident (my arrest, etc.), he preserved a stubborn silence, even though he assured the person who brought him the message that he would comply with all my requests

"A few months later I received a letter from K.,§ a reliable, unprejudiced man, informing me that my expulsion had been the work of the refugee parliament

a In the very act of committing an offence.— Ed. h An allusion to the arms of the Cantons of Berne and Uri.— Ed. c "It is the refrain about danger, I know it by heart." — Ed. ^ "To skin a man alive." — Ed. e That was the last I heard of my expenses and fees.— Ed. f Literally: out of the depths. Figuratively: from a state of extreme suffering (Psalms 130T).— Ed.

s Presumably a letter from Friedrich Kamm written in 1852.— Ed.

entre poire et fromage}3 would savagely devour both his mummy and the reincarnated form to the horror of those present. It is true that I was no admirer of the parliamentarians' deeds, quite the reverse! But is it likely that these gentlemen intended to punish me for this by an Imperial ban—regarding Switzerland as part of the Empire because both the Imperial Constitution and the most recent resolution of the Imperial Diet lie buried there? I think it more likely that the presumption of their persecution of myself is connected with the parliamentary rebellion mentioned in my previous letterc against the Geneva Refugee Committee formed by myself, Becker and a number of Genevan citizens Why these gentlemen wished to usurp the right to distribute the refugee funds was a matter about which even they differed among themselves. Some of them, among them Dentzel from the little Chamber of Baden, preferred, contrary to our practice of giving aid above all to penniless workers, to wipe away the tears of professional sufferers, heroes of the revolution, patriotic sons of the nation, who had seen better days Is fecit cui prodest,d as the saying goes in the trade, and since my activities were, it is true, inconvenient to these gentlemen, the suspicion arose that they had made use of their influence in important places to bring about my removal. It was known that they had the aurem principise or, at any rate, they were close enough to it to whisper something or other about my restiveness, and that princeps Tourte especially had frequently gathered them around himself"

Having described how he was moved from the Old Tower in Berne to Basle and then over the French frontier, Schily continues:

"As far as the expense entailed in expelling refugees is concerned, I cherish the hope that the costs were defrayed not by the Federal Treasury, but by that of the Holy Alliance. For one day a considerable time after our entry into Switzerland, Princess Olga was sitting at luncheon in a Berne restaurant with the Russian chargé d'affaires there.f Entre poire et fromage {sans comparaison to the terrible Reinach) Her Highness remarked to her table companion: 'Eh bien, Monsieur le baron, avez-vous encore beaucoup de réfugiés ici?' 'Pas mal, Princesse,' he replied, 'bien que nous en ayons déjà beaucoup renvoyé. M. Druey fait de son mieux à cet égard, et si de nouveaux fonds nous arrivent, nous en renverrons bien encore.'s This was overheard and passed on to me by the waiter on duty, a quondam volunteer in the Imperial campaign where he served under my august command."

a Convincingly.— Ed. b Over the dessert.— Ed. c Schily's letter of February 8, I860 (see this volume, pp. 43-46).— Ed. d He did it who benefits by it (Seneca, Medea, III, 500-01).— Ed. e Ear of the authorities.— Ed. f Pavel Alexeyevich Krüdener.— Ed. s "Well, Baron, are there still many refugees here?" "Quite a few, Your Highness, although we have already sent many of them back. M. Druey does his best in this respect, and if we receive new funds we shall be able to send back even more."—Ed.



**[p. 300]**

"It has remained a mystery to this very day how my effects could have vanished in Le Havre from the chaos of bundles accompanying a German émigré train (into which we had been incorporated in Basle by Klenk, the emigration agent, whom the Federal authorities had hired to transport us to Le Havre, with the result that all the luggage belonging to the refugees and emigrants had become hopelessly confused), unless it had been achieved with the aid of a list of the refugees and their baggage. Perhaps the Swiss Consul in Le Havre, the merchant Wanner, to whom we were sent for further transportation, knows more about it. He promised that we would be fully compensated. Druey later confirmed this promise in a letter which I sent to Advocate Vogt in Berne to enable him to pursue the matter in the Federal Council. However, I have not been able to get it back from him up to now, nor have I ever received a reply to any of the letters I wrote to him. On the other hand, in the summer of 1856 my complaint was rejected by the Federal Council and I was warned to keep the peace, without being given any reasons for this decision

"All this and all the expulsions involving so many gendarmes, handcuffs, etc., are mere trivia, however, compared to the peculiarly cosy good-neighbourly arrangement of sending home the so-called less serious offenders of the Baden campaign, providing them with special travel passes and directing them to report on their arrival to the local authorities where, instead of being allowed to resume their occupations, as they had been led to expect, they were subjected to all sorts of unexpected penances. The silent sufferings of all those extradited in this way (for extradition is the correct word) are still waiting for their chronicler and avenger.

"The Swiss Tacitus speaking of Switzerland says that it does a man credit 'if his faults may be mentioned without detracting from his greatness'. There is no lack of materials for praise of this kind; to praise Switzerland in this manner does not spoil its figure qui aime bien châtie bien? And in fact I for my part have an irrepressible love for Switzerland by and large. I like both the country and the people. Keeping a gun as part of his household equipment, always ready and skilful in using it to protect historical traditions of good repute and modern achievements of good quality, the Swiss in my eyes definitely deserves respect. He is entitled to the sympathies of others because he himself feels sympathy for others who struggle to improve their situation. 'I would rather that God had lost his best pair of angels,' a Swiss farmer said in his annoyance at the failure of the South German uprising. He might not have been prepared to risk a team of his horses for it, but he would have been more likely to risk his skin and his gun. In his heart of hearts the Swiss is not neutral, even if he practises neutrality because of, and in order to preserve, his inherited possessions. Incidentally the old crust of neutrality which cloaks his better nature will probably soon burst asunder with all these foreign feet trampling on it—for that is after all the essence of neutrality—and there will be a big bang and that will clear the air."

Thus far Schily's letter. In the Prison Tower in Berne he was not able to arrange a personal meeting with Druey, but he did manage to exchange letters with that gentleman. In reply to a letter from Schily inquiring into the reasons for his arrest and asking permission to consult his lawyer, Herr Wyss in Berne, Druey wrote on April 9, 1852:

[^1]: a He who loves well chastises well.— Ed.





**[p. 301]**

The letters which Schily was permitted, after numerous com- plaints, to write to his friends in Geneva had all to be submitted beforehand to M. Druey to inspect. In one of these letters Schily used the expression "Vae victis"P7 Druey wrote to him about it in a letter dated April 19, 1852:

"Dans le billet que vous avez adressé à M. J.,d se trouvent les mots: vae victis Cela veut-il dire que les autorités fédérales vous traitent en vaincu? S'il en était ainsi, ce serait une accusation mensongère, contre laquelle je devrais protester."e

Schily replied to the mighty Druey in a letter dated April 21, 1852:

"Je ne pense pas, M. le conseiller fédéral, que cette manière de caractériser les mesures prises à mon égard puisse me valoir le reproche d'une accusation mensongère; du moins un pareil reproche ne serait pas de nature à me faire revenir de l'idée que je suis traité avec dureté; au contraire, adressé à un prisonnier, par celui qui le tient en prison, une telle réponse me paraîtrait une dureté de plus."f

3 Marx has: "déposition".— Ed. b Marx has: "police".— Ed. c "The Genevan authorities have ordered your expulsion from the Canton; they have had you arrested and conducted to Berne and put at the disposition of my department, because you have shown yourself to be one of the most restive of the refugees and have tried to conceal the whereabouts of I. and B., of which you were obliged to inform the authorities. For this reason and because your further residence in Switzerland would have harmed the international relations of the Confederation, the Federal Council has resolved on expelling you from Swiss territory, etc. Since the purpose of your arrest was not the institution of any criminal or civil action against you, but is a measure necessitated by considerations of high politics there is no need for you to consult a lawyer. In any event before authorising the interview you request with M. Wyss, your lawyer, I should have to know for what purpose you want to consult him. "—Ed.

d Abraham Jacoby.— Ed. e "The note you have written to M. J. contains the words: vae victis Is that supposed to mean that the Federal authorities treat you as one treats a defeated opponent? If this is the implication, it is a lying accusation against which I should feel bound to protest." — Ed.

f "I do not believe, Federal Councillor, that the way in which I have described the measures taken in my regard can be thought to merit the reproach of making lying accusations; at the very least such a reproach is hardly likely to persuade me that I am not being treated harshly; on the contrary, for me as a prisoner to receive an answer like this from the person who keeps me in prison seems to be another harsh act." — Ed.



**[p. 302]**

Herr Trog was said to be busy cleaning out a nest of German communists with a brood of 84 communist dragons inside it, etc. Alongside this reactionary Genevan paper a scribbler in Berne who belonged to the parliamentary gang—it must be assumed that it was Karl Vogt since he repeatedly claims in the "Magnum Opus" that it was he who had rescued Switzerland from the clutches of the communist refugees—was busy spreading similar news in the Frankfurter Journal over the initials "ss". For example, he wrote that the Genevan Committee to aid German refugees, a committee consisting of communists, had been overthrown because of its inequitable distribution of the available funds, and that it had been replaced by upright men (namely parliamentarians) who would soon put an end to these evil practices. He wrote further that the dictator of Geneva seemed at last to be prepared to comply with the ordinances of the Federal Commissars, since two German refugees belonging to the communist faction had shortly before been put under arrest and brought from Geneva to Berne, etc.238 The Schweizerische National-Zeitung, which appears in Basle, published an answer from Geneva in its issue No. 72, of March 25, 1852, in which it said inter alia:

"Every unbiassed person knows that just as Switzerland is concerned only with the consolidation and constitutional development of its political achievements, so too the feeble remnants of the German emigration in this country are occupied entirely with earning their daily bread and other perfectly harmless pursuits, and that the fairy-tales about communism are the product of hallucinations on the part of philistines or else are concocted by politically or personally interested informers."

After the Berne parliamentary correspondent of the Frankfurter Journal had been described as one of these informers—the article concludes:

"The refugees here are of the opinion that in their ranks there are a number of so-called 'decent men' on the pattern of the former 'Biedermen and Bassermen of the Empire'3 who, driven by nostalgia for the flesh-pots of home, seek to pave the way for their own pardon at the hands of their native rulers by reactionary expectorations of this kind. We should like to send them our best wishes for a

a A pun on the names of Friedrich Karl Biedermann and Friedrich Daniel Bassermann, Biedermann means "honest man" and, in an ironical sense, "philistine". Bassermansch means "homeless tramp" or "beggar".— Ed.



**[p. 303]**

Schily was known to the refugee parliamentarians as the author of this article. It appeared in the Basle National-Zeitung on March 25, and on April 1 Schily's wholly unmotivated arrest took place. "Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?"a

2. THE REVOLUTIONARY CONGRESS IN MURTEN

After the Murten scandalb the German refugees in Geneva, with the exception of the refugee parliamentarians, issued a protest addressed "To the Supreme Department of Justice and the Police of the Confederation", from which I print the following pas240 sage : " The monarchs did not rest content with their previous diplomatic gains. They rattled their sabres all around Switzerland and threatened military occupation so as to make a clean sweep of the refugees. The Federal Council at any rate has expressed its concern about this danger in an official document. And lo and behold! There were further deportations, justified this time by the notorious assembly in Murten and the claim that traces of political and propagandistic activities had been uncovered by the investigation following it. As far as the facts are concerned this claim must be categorically rejected From the legal point of view, however, it is important to bear in mind that wherever the rule of law obtains, actions proscribed by the law can only be punished by penalties laid down by the law, and this holds good for deportation too, if it is not to appear as the arbitrary action of the police. Or was perhaps here too the intention to play off diplomacy against us and to say: we have been forced to act thus out of consideration for foreign powers, in the interests of international relations? Very well, then, if this is the position, the cross of the Confederation0 should hide its head in shame before the Turkish crescent, which, when the myrmidons searching for refugees knock on the Porte,d shows its horns and does not eat humble pie.e If this is the position, then give us our passports so that we can go to Turkey and when the door has closed behind us, hand over the keys to the Swiss bastion of liberty to the Holy Alliance as a feudurn oblatum,{ and hold them in future as the insignia of chamberlains of the Holy Alliance, with the motto: Finis Helvetiae!" s

a "Can heavenly spirits cherish resentment so dire?" Virgil, Aeneid, I, 11.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 50-55.— Ed. c Switzerland's national flag.— Ed. d A pun in the original: an der Pforte klopft (literally, "knocks on the door". Pforte in German means both "door" and "the Porte", i.e. the Turkish Government).— Ed.

e In the original: nicht zu Kreuze kriecht—"does not crawl to the cross".— Ed. f Feudal fief.— Ed. s End to Switzerland! (by analogy with Finis Poloniae!—End to Poland! See p. 148 of this volume).— Ed.



**[p. 304]**

I realised from Joh. Ph. Becker's letter3 that the "associate of Marx" or the "associates" of Cherval mentioned by the Vogt of the Empireb could only be Herr Stecher, now resident in London. Up to that time I had not had the honour of making his personal acquaintance, although I had heard many complimentary descrip- tions of his great and many-sided artistic talents. In consequence of Becker's letter we met for the first time. The following is a letter from my "associate" to me.c

"17 Sussex St., London W. C. October 14, 1860

"Dear Herr Marx,

"I am glad to be able to give you some information about Nugent (Cherval-Crämer) who was mentioned in Vogt's pamphlet of which you were kind enough to send me an extract. In March 1853 I came to Geneva after a trip to Italy. Nugent arrived in Geneva at around the same time and I made his acquaintance in a lithography workshop. I had myself just taken up lithography and since Nugent had a thorough knowledge of it, and since he was extremely agreeable, energetic and industrious by nature, I accepted his proposal to share an atelier with him. What Vogt says about Nugent's activities in Geneva is roughly the same as what I heard for myself at the time, if you discount the usual exaggerations to be expected from journalists or pamphleteers. There was very little success. I knew only one of the group, a good-natured and hard-working, but otherwise imprudent and light-minded young man. And since he was one of the leaders it must be presumed that N. was everything in the group and the others nothing but curious listeners. I am convinced that neither stone nor copper plates were ever engraved, although I heard N. talk of such matters. My own acquaintances were mainly Genevans and Italians. I was aware that later on I was thought to be a spy by Vogt and other German refugees, whom I did not know. But I took no notice of it—the truth will always out. I was not even offended; it was so easy to arouse suspicion as there were spies aplenty and to discover who they were was not always a simple matter. I am almost certain that Nugent did not correspond with anyone in Geneva after he had been expelled from there. I later received two letters from him inviting me to join him in Paris to help him with a project on medieval architecture, which I did. In Paris I found Nugent to be utterly remote from politics and correspondence. AH this of course suggests that I myself could be 'the associates of Marx! since I neither saw nor heard of anyone else whom Nugent had induced to come to Paris. Of course Herr Vogt could not know that I had never had any contact with you, either direct or indirect, and that I probably never would have had, if I had not moved to London where by chance I have had the pleasure of meeting you and your esteemed family.

"With best wishes to you and your ladies,

H. Cal. Stecher"

a See this volume, pp. 60-64.— Ed. b See Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 175.— Ed. c This letter has not been found.— Ed.



**[p. 305]**

In this section I wish to make public information concerning the Prussian Embassy in London and its correspondence with Prussian authorities on the Continent during the Cologne trial. This information is based on the confessions of Hirsch which were published by A. Willich in April 1853 in the New-Yorker Criminal- Zeitung under the title "Die Opfer der Moucharderie, Rechtfer- tigungsschrift von Wilhelm Hirsch".3 Hirsch, who is at present in a Hamburg gaol, was the principal tool of Police Lieutenant Greif and his agent Fleury. It was on instructions from them and under their direction that he forged the false Minute-Book submitted as evidence by Stieber in the course of the communist trial. I give here a number of excerpts from Hirsch's memoirs.

(During the Great Exhibition) "the German associations were kept under surveillance by a police triumvirate: Police Superintendent Stieber for Prussia, a Herr Kubesch for Austria and Police Commissioner Huntel of Bremen".

Having volunteered to act as an informer, Hirsch had an interview in London with Alberts who was Secretary at the Prussian Embassy. He gives this account of their first meeting:

"The meetings of the Prussian Embassy in London with its secret agents take place at a public house well fitted for the purpose. The Cock, in Fleet St., Temple Bar, is so unobtrusive that but for a golden cock pointing to the entrance the casual passer-by would hardly notice it. I went through a narrow passage leading to the interior of this old English tavern and asked for Mr. Charles, whereupon a corpulent personage introduced himself to me with such an amiable smile that anyone seeing us would have taken us to be old friends. The Embassy agent (for this is what he was) seemed to be in very high spirits and his mood was still further improved by brandy and water. He enjoyed it so much that for a long time he seemed to have completely forgotten the purpose of our meeting. Mr. Charles at once revealed that his true name was Alberts and that he was the Embassy Secretary. To begin with, he informed me that in fact he had nothing to do with the police but that he would act as an intermediary in this case A second meeting took place at his home in 39 Brewer St., Golden Square, and it was here that I made the acquaintance of Police Lieutenant Greif. Greif looked the true policeman: medium height, dark hair and a beard of the same colour cut in the regulation style, with the moustache meeting the side-whiskers and the chin left shaven. His eyes looked anything but intelligent and they protruded fiercely in a permanent glare, apparently the result of frequent association with thieves and rogues Like Herr Alberts, Herr Greif introduced himself to me by the pseudonym of Mr. Charles. The latest Mr. Charles was at least in a more serious mood and he even felt it was necessary to test me Our first meeting ended with his instructing me to give him an accurate report on all the activities of the revolutionary émigrés On the next

a This article was published in instalments in the Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung on April 1, 8, 15 and 22, 1853. Excerpts from it are contained in Marx's notebook. For his assessment of it see his article "Hirsch's Confessions" (present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed.



**[p. 306]**

Greif left London for some time and parted from Hirsch

"expressly commending me to the latest Mr. Charles who, he said, acted always on his instructions. I should not hesitate to confide in him. Moreover, even if certain things should appear strange to me I should not be surprised. To make this clearer he added: 'The Ministry sometimes requires various things, chiefly documents; if these are unobtainable we should find some way out!"'

Hirsch states further that the latest Charles was Fleury.

"He had earlier been employed in the office of the Dresdner Zeitung, which was edited by L. Wittig. When he was in Baden, he was, as a result of recommendations he had brought from Saxony, sent by the provisional government to the Palatinate to take in hand the organisation of the Landsturm, etc. When the Prussians occupied Karlsruhe he was taken prisoner, etc. He suddenly reappeared in London towards the end of 1850 or early in 1851; from the outset he went here by the name of de Fleury and was known by this name in refugee circles. He was hard up, at least he seemed to be, stayed in the refugee barracks set up by the Refugee Committee and drew subsidies. Early in the summer of 1851 his position suddenly improved; he moved into a respectable apartment and at the end of the year he married the daughter of an English engineer. He turned up later in Paris as a police agent His real name is Krause and he is the son of Krause the cobbler who was executed some 15 or 18 years ago in Dresden together with Backhof and Beseler for the murder of Countess Schönberg and her maid Fleury-Krause told me many times that he had been working for different governments since he was 14."

It is this same Fleury-Krause whom Stieber admitted in open court in Cologne to be a secret Prussian police agent working directly under Greif. In my Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne I wrote of Fleury:

"Fleury is not indeed the Fleur de Marie of the police prostitutes, but he is a flower3 and he will bear blossom, albeit only fleurs-de-lys." *

This prophecy has in a sense been fulfilled; some months after the communist trial Fleury was sentenced in England to several years in the hulksb for forgery.

* Fleurs-de-lys [lilies] is the French colloquial name of the letters T. F. (travaux forcés, forced labour), the brand-mark of criminals. [Note by Engels to the 1885 edition of the Revelations. See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 442.]

a A pun: Fleur de Marie—the heroine in Eugène Sue's novel Les mystères de Paris, fleur—a flower.— Ed.

[^1]: b Marx uses the English word.— Ed.





**[p. 307]**

Fleury was in contact with Max Reuter who stole the letters from Oswald Dietz, at that time archivist of the Schapper-Willich League.241

"Stieber," says Hirsch, "had learned from the agent of the Prussian Ambassador in Paris Hatzfeldt, the notorious Cherval, of the letters written by the latter to London. Stieber got Reuter to find out where they were, whereupon Fleury stole them on Stieber's orders and with Reuter's aid. These are the stolen letters which Herr Stieber was not ashamed to exhibit 'as such' to the jury in Cologne In autumn 1851 Fleury had been in Paris with Greif and Stieber after the latter had, through the mediation of Count Hatzfeldt, made contact with Cherval, or more correctly, Joseph Cramer with whose assistance he hoped to engineer a plot. With this end in view consultations were held in Paris between Messrs. Stieber, Greif, Fleury, two other police agents, Beckmann* and Sommer, and the famous French spy Lucien de la Hodde (who went by the name of Duprez) and they gave Cherval directions according to which he was to tailor his correspondence. Fleury often laughed in my presence over the scuffle he had provoked between Stieber and Cherval. And the man called Schmidt who in the guise of secretary of a revolutionary league in Strasbourg and Cologne had gained admission to the society founded at the behest of the police by Cherval, was none other than M. de Fleury Fleury was undoubtedly the sole agent of the Prussian secret police in London and all proposals and offers that the Embassy received went through his hands Messrs. Greif and Stieber were accustomed to relying on his judgment."

Fleury informed Hirsch:

"Herr Greif has told you what has to be done At Police Headquarters in Frankfurt they are themselves of the opinion that our primary aim must be to make the position of the political police secure, the means we use to achieve this are immaterial; the September plot in Paris is already one step in this direction."3

Greif returned to London and expressed satisfaction with Hirsch's work but demanded more. In particular he wanted reports on "the secret meetings of the Marx party".

"At all costs," the Police Lieutenant concluded, "we must draw up reports on the League meetings. Do it any way you wish as long as you don't overstep the limits of credibility. I am too occupied to attend to it myself. M. de Fleury will work with you as my representative."

Greifs occupation at that time consisted, as Hirsch states, in a correspondence via de la Hodde-Duprez with Maupas concerning

* The same man b who figures in the Arnim Trial. [Note by Marx in the 1875 edition of the Revelations, to which Appendix 4 to Herr Vogt was supplemented.] He was already then Paris correspondent for the Kölnische Zeitung and was to remain so for many years, [Engels' addition to Marx's note in the 1885 edition of the Revelations.]

[^1]: 1 Reckmann.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 55-56.— F.d.





**[p. 308]**

"Marx had not founded any new central organisation of the League in London Greif agreed with Fleury that in the circumstances we should for the time being prepare reports on meetings of the League ourselves. He, Greif, would vouch for their authenticity, and in any case his submissions would be accepted".

So Hirsch and Fleury set to work."The content" of their reports on the secret meetings of the League I held

"was provided", Hirsch states, "by reports of discussions that took place from time to time; the admission of new members, the founding of new sections in obscure corners of Germany, or a new organisation; speculation to the effect that in Cologne Marx's imprisoned friends did or did not have any prospects of being released; letters that had come from this person or that, and so on. On this last point Fleury usually took care to mention people in Germany who had become suspect as a result of political investigations or who had been involved in some political activity or other. Very often, however, we had to have recourse to our imagination and then we would report on the activities of a non-existent member of the League. But Herr Greif said that the reports were excellent and that anyway we had to have them at all costs. Some of the writing was done by Fleury alone but mostly I had to help him as he was unable to describe the smallest detail without errors of style. In this way the reports came into being and without a moment's hesitation Herr Greif declared his willingness to vouch for their authenticity".

Hirsch then describes how Fleury and he visited Arnold Ruge in Brighton, and Eduard Meyen (of Tobian memory3) and stole letters and lithographed material from them. Not content with this, Greif-Fleury rented a lithographic press from Stanbury Press, Fetter Lane, and together with Hirsch began to produce "radical pamphlets". That "democrat", F. Zabel, could learn a lesson or two here. Let him take note of this:

"The first pamphlet I" (Hirsch) "wrote was entitled An das Landproletariat at Fleury's suggestion; and we managed to make a few good copies of it. Herr Greif sent these copies as documents emanating from the Marx party. To make it seem more plausible we included in the reports of the so-called League meetings, which came into being in the manner described above, a few words about the dispatch of such a pamphlet. One other product of this kind was fabricated; its title was An die Kinder des Volkes and I do not know under whose auspices Herr Greif sent this one in. We later abandoned this trick chiefly because it was so costly."

At this point Cherval arrived in London after his mock escape from Paris and was attached to Greif at a weekly salary of £1 10s.,

"in return for which he was required to make reports on the contacts between the German and French émigrés".

Publicly exposed and expelled from the Workers' Society as a

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 239.— Ed.





**[p. 309]**

Hirsch now returns to the Cologne trial.

"Herr Greif had already been questioned a number of times about the contents of the League reports prepared at his instance by Fleury in so far as they had any bearing on the Cologne trial There were also particular commissions in connection with the trial. On one occasion Marx was alleged to be corresponding with Lassalle via an 'ale-house' and the Public Prosecutor required further information Rather more naïve was the Public Prosecutor's request asking for precise information about the financial assistance that Lassalle in Düsseldorf was allegedly sending to the defendant Röser in Cologne it was believed that the true source of the money was in London."

I have already recounted in Section III, 4 how Fleury, acting on instructions from Hinckeldey, was to find someone in London who would be willing to appear before the jury in Cologne in the guise of H.,a the witness who had disappeared, etc. After a detailed account of this incident Hirsch goes on:

"Herr Stieber had meanwhile urgently requested Greif to supply him, if at all possible, with the original minutes of the League meetings that he had been reporting on. Fleury was of the opinion that he could produce an original minute-book if only the requisite people were available. Above all, however, he would need specimens of the handwriting of some of Marx's friends. I made use of this last remark in order to extricate myself from the whole undertaking; Fleury alluded to the topic only once again and after that he said nothing more. Around this time Stieber suddenly appeared in Cologne with a Minute-Book of the League's central organisation in London I was even more astonished when I found that the minutes as reported in extract in the papers were absolutely identical with the reports concocted by Fleury at Greifs behest. It was evident that Herr Greif or Herr Stieber himself had had a copy made somehow or other, for the minutes in this allegedly original document bore signatures while those submitted by Fleury had none. From Fleury himself I learned about this miracle only that 'Stieber can contrive anything, it will be a sensation!'"

As soon as Fleury heard that "Marx" had had the handwriting of the ostensible signatories of the minutes (Liebknecht, Rings, Ulmer, etc.) witnessed in a London Police Courtb he wrote the following letter:

" To the Royal Police Presidium in Berlin; dated from London. "It is the intention of Marx and his friends here to discredit the signatures on the League Minutes by having handwriting specimens legally authenticated. These specimens are to be produced in the Court of Assizes as the really authentic ones. Everyone familiar with the English laws knows that on this point they can be

[^1]: a Haupt (see this volume, p. 67).— Ed. b Marx uses English: Police Court.— Ed.





**[p. 310]**

With regard to the Minute-Book Hirsch says that

"Herr Stieber declared" (in court) "that he had had the Minute-Book in his hands for two weeks but had scrupled to produce it; he declared further that it had come to him by a courier called Greif Hence Greif had personally delivered his own work. How can this be reconciled with a letter of Herr Goldheim's in which he informed the Embassy that 'the Minute-Book was produced so late only in order to avoid scrutiny as to its authenticity'"

On Friday, October 29, Herr Goldheim arrived in London.

"As Herr Stieber had to face the fact that it was not possible to uphold the authenticity of the Minute-Book he sent a deputy to negotiate with Fleury about it on the spot. At issue was the question whether a proof could not be obtained after all. His discussions were fruitless and he returned without any decision having been reached. Fleury was left in a state of despair for Stieber was now resolved to expose him rather than compromise the police chiefs. But I did not realise that this was the cause of Fleury's disquiet until Herr Stieber made his declaration soon afterwards. In panic, M. Fleury now resorted to his last expedient. He brought me a specimen of handwriting for me to use to copy out a declaration, sign it 'Liebknecht' and take an oath before the Lord Mayor of London that I was Liebknecht Fleury told me that the handwriting was that of the person who had written the Minute-Book and that Herr Goldheim had brought it with him" (from Cologne). "But if Herr Stieber had received the Minute-Book per Greif, the courier from London, how was it possible for Herr Goldheim to bring a specimen of the handwriting of the alleged Minute-Book writer from Cologne at the very moment when Greif had just arrived back in London? What Fleury gave me consisted of a few phrases and a signature" Hirsch 'copied the handwriting as closely as he could and wrote that the undersigned, i.e. Liebknecht, declared that the signature of Liebknecht legally witnessed by Maix and Co. was false and that this, his signature was the only genuine one. When I had finished and had the handwriting in my hands" (i.e. the specimen given him by Fleury to copy), "which fortunately I still possess, I told Fleury, who was not a little taken aback, that I had had second thoughts and would not go through with it. Inconsolable at first, he then announced that he would swear to it himselfFor safety's sake he would have the writing countersigned by the Prussian Consul; and he went to the Consulate at once. I waited for him in a tavern; when he got back he had the countersignature



**[p. 311]**

Fleury's last meetings with Hirsch took place at the end of October 1852. Hirsch's confessions are dated the end of November 1852; and at the end of March 1853 came the "explosion in Berlin" (the Ladendorf conspiracy).*24S

* The reader will be interested to see the testimonials that Stieber himself gave his two accomplices Fleury-Krause and Hirsch. He writes of the first in the Black Book'244

II, p. 69:

"No. 345. Krause, Carl Friedrich August, from Dresden. He is the son of Friedrich August Krause, a farmer executed for his part in the murder of Countess Schönberg in Dresden in 1834, and afterwards" (after his execution?) "a corn-dealer, and of his widow Johanna Rosine née Göllnitz, who is still living. Carl Friedrich was born on January 9, 1824, in the vineyard houses at Coswig near Dresden. From October 1, 1832, he went to the charity school in Dresden; in 1836 he was admitted to the orphanage in Antonstadt, Dresden, and in 1840 he was confirmed. He was then apprenticed to Herr Gruhle, a Dresden merchant, but in the following year he was arrested and detained by the Dresden Municipal Court for repeated theft. However, the period of detention was counted towards his sentence and he was released. After this he lived with his mother without taking a job, but in March 1842 he was arrested again for breaking and entering and this time he was sentenced to four years' imprisonment. On October 23, 1846, he came out of gaol and returned to Dresden and began to associate with the most notorious thieves. Then, the Rehabilitation Society took him up and found him a job in a cigar factory and he remained in this job without interruption or any further misdemeanour until March 1848. But after that date he gave in to his idleness again and began to frequent political societies" (as a government spy; see above his admission to Hirsch in London). "Early in 1849 he became a salesman of the Dresdner Zeitung edited by the republican literateur E. L. Wittig who is now in America but who at that time was in Dresden. In May 1849 he took part in the Dresden uprising and became commandant of the barricade in the Sophienstrasse. He fled to Baden after the uprising was quelled and there he was empowered by the provisional government of Baden (the decrees of June 10 and 23, 1849) to raise a Landsturm and requisition supplies for the insurgents. He was taken prisoner by Prussian soldiers but on October 8, 1849, he escaped from Rastatt." (Just as, later on, Cherval "escaped" from Paris. But now comes the part of the bouquet which has the authentic police- aroma—it should be borne in mind that this was primed two vears alter the Cologne Trial.) "According to a report in the Berlin Publizist, No. 39 of May 15, 1853, taken from a book printed in New York with the tttie Die Opfer der Spionage* by Wilhelm Hirsch, a Hamburg shop-assistant" (() Stieber, you foreboding angel!,J;. "Krause

a Die Opfer der Moucharderie, Rechtfertigungsschrift von Wilhelm Hirsch.—Ed. '' See this volume, p. 71.— Ed.



**[p. 312]**

When the communist trial in Cologne was over, Vogt-like calumnies about my "exploitation" of the workers were busily disseminated, especially in the German-American press. Some of my friends living in America—Messrs. J. Weydemeyer, Dr. A. jacoby (a practising doctor in New York and one of the defendants in the Cologne communist trial) and A. Cluss (an official in the U.S. Navy Yard in Washington) — published a detailed refutation of these absurdities dated New York, November 7, Î853. Their article contained the comment that I was in the right to preserve silence about my private affairs insofar as it was a matter of gaining the approval of the philistines. "But when faced by the hostility of the mob, the philistines and the

turned up in London late in 1850 or early in 1851 as a political émigré bearing the name of Charles de Fleury. At first he lived in somewhat straitened circumstances but later, in 1851, his position improved. For after he was admitted to the Communist League" (another Stieber lie), "he worked as an agent for a number of governments in the course of which, however, he became involved in a number of swindles."

So much for Stieber's gratitude to his friend Fleury who, moreover (as we noted above), was sentenced to several vears' imprisonment in London for forgery just a few months after the Cologne trial.

Concerning the worthy Hirsch we can read (op. cit., p. 58):

"No. 265. Hirsch, Wilhelm, shop-assistant from Hamburg. Tt appears that he went to London not as a refugee but of his own accord." (Why this wholly superfluous lie? After all, Goldheim tried to arrest him in Hamburg!) "But once there he associated with refugees and especially with the communist party. He played a double game. On the one hand, he was active on behalf of the revolutionary party, while, on the other, he offered to spy on political criminals and forgers for a number of continental governments. But he himself became implicated in the worst possible frauds

t-nd swindles. In particular, he was guilty of forgery, so that everyone should be on their guard against him,. Together with various other individuals he even manufactured false paper money merely in order to extract high rewards from the police for uncovering forgeries. He was eventually unmasked by both sides" (namely, both by police forgers and non-police ones?) "and he has now returned from London to Hamburg where he lives in poor circumstances."

Thus far Stieber on his London accomplices to whose "truthfulness and reliability" he is never tired of testifying. It is interesting to see how utterly impossible it is for this model Prussian to speak the simple truth. He cannot even restrain himself from smuggling* quite purposeless lies into the—true and false—facts taken from the documents. On the testimony of such professional liars — and they are more numerous now than ever—hundreds of people are sent to prison and in this lies what is nowadays called salvation of the state. [This note to Appendix 4 was added by Engels in the 3rd (1885) edition of the Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.]

a A pun on the name Stieber and the verb hineinstiebern (to smuggle in, insert).— Ed.



**[p. 313]**

6. THE WAR BETWEEN FROGS AND MICEb

In my pamphlet The Knight, etc., from which I quoted above, I wrote on p. 5:

"On July 20, 1851 the 'Agitation Union' was founded, and on July 27, 1851 the German 'Émigré Club'. From that day dates the struggle on both sides of the ocean between the 'Émigrés' and the 'Agitators', the great war between frogs and mice.

Now who will give me words and who the tongue, To sing of such brave deeds in sonorous sounds! For ne'er was strife upon this earth begun More proudly fought on bloodier battle grounds; Compared to this all other wars are roses. To tell of it my lyric art confounds For on this earth there ne'er was seen such glory Or noble valour bright as in this story.

(After Boiardo, Orlando innamorato, Canto 27.)"c

Now it is by no means my intention to go into the details of "the story" of this strife or into the agreement entitled, verbotenus,d

"The Preliminary Agreement about the Treaty on the Alliance" (under which name it was publicised throughout the entire German-American press), which was reached between Gottfried

Kinkel in the name of the Émigré Club, and A. Goegg on behalf of the "Revolutionary League of the Two Worlds", on August 13, 1852. I would only remark that with a few exceptions the entire parliamentary emigration joined in the farce on one side or the other. (Of course, names like K. Vogt were at that time avoided by every party if only for propriety's sake.)

At the end of his revolutionary pleasure and fund-raising tour of the United States, Gottfried Kinkel, the passion flower of German philistinism, wrote a "Denkschrift über das deutsche Nationalanlehn zur Förderung der Revolution", dated Elmira,N. Y., February 22, 1852, in which he gave vent to views which at least

a J. Weydemeyer, A. Cluss, A. Jacoby, "An die Redaktion der New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, November 7, 1853", New-Yorker Criminal Zeitung, No. 37, November 25, 1853.— Ed.

[^1]: b See this volume, p. 87.— Ed. c See present edition, Vol. 12, p. 488.— Ed. d Literally.— Ed.





**[p. 314]**

In a public meeting with Kossuth, who was also engaged at that time on a revolutionary fund-raising campaign in the United States, Gottfried expressed himself in highly aesthetic terms:

"Even from your clean hands, Governor, the gift of freedom would be a bitter pill, and I would moisten it with the tears of my shame."b

Hence Gottfried, having looked the gift-horse so sharply in the mouth, assured the governor that if the latter should present to him "the revolution in the east" with his right hand, he, Gottfried, would present to him "the revolution in the west" in return. Seven years later, in the Hermann, a paper he had founded himself, the very same Gottfried assured his readers that he was a man of rare consistency,c and that having proclaimed the Prince Regentd as Emperor of Germany before the military court in Rastatt,245 he had always kept this as his motto.

Count Oskar Reichenbach, one of the three original regents and the Treasurer of the Revolutionary Loan, published the accounts in London on October 8, 1852, together with a statement in which he dissociated himself from the enterprise. At the same time he declared that "in any event I neither can nor will hand the money over to citizens Kinkel, etc." Instead he invited the shareholders to hand in their provisional loan certificates in exchange for the money in his hands. His own resignation as treasurer, etc., he said,

"was motivated by political and legal considerations The assumptions on which the idea of the loan was based have not been realised. The sum of 20,000

a Marx uses the English phrase: "public opinion".— Ed. b G. Kinkel, "Denkschrift über das deutsche Nationalanlehn zur Förderung der Revolution", New-Yorker Staats-Zeitung, March 2, 1852.— Ed.

c G. Kinkel, "Brief des Herausgebers an einen Freund in Amerika", Hermann, March 26, 1859.— Ed.

[^1]: d William.— Ed.





**[p. 315]**

But Gottfried's faith in revolution could not be shaken so easily and so he procured a "resolution" that allowed him to carry on the business under another name.

Reichenbach's statement of the accounts contains some interest- ing data.

"The Trustees," he says, "cannot be held responsible for contributions which may have been made later by the committees to persons other than myself, and I would ask the committees to take note of this when calling in the certificates and settling accounts."

According to his computations £1,587 6s. 4d. was received, of which London had contributed £2 5s., and "Germany" £9. The expenditure amounted to £584 18s. 5d. and was broken down as follows: Kinkeïs and Hillgärtner's, travel expenses: £220; other travel expenses: £54; lithographic press: £11; cost of provisional certifi- cates: £14; lithographed correspondence, stamps, etc.: £106 Is. 6d. On Kinkel's instructions, etc.: £100.

The Revolutionary Loan ended up with £1,000, which Gottfried Kinkel keeps in the Westminster Bank as earnest money for the first German provisional government. And despite all this, there is still no provisional government. Perhaps Germany believes that 36 actual governments are quite sufficient.

Certain American loan funds which were not incorporated into the central London Treasury were at least employed here and there for patriotic purposes. Such was the case with the £100 which Gottfried Kinkel gave to Karl Blind early in 1858 to transform into "radical pamphlets", etc.

7. PALMERSTON-POLEMIC

"Council Hall, Sheffield, May 6th, 1856

"Doctor,

"The Sheffield Foreign Affairs Committee instruct me to convey to you an expression of their warm thanks for the great public service you have rendered by your admirable exposé of the Kars-Papersa published in the People's Paper.

"I have the honour, &c. "Dr. Karl Marx"b Wm. Cyples, Secretary

[^1]: a Marx's series of articles "The Fall of Kars" (see present edition, Vol. 14).— Ed. b Marx quotes the letter in English.— Ed.





**[p. 316]**

Herr A. Scherzer, a man who has played a praiseworthy role in the workers' movement since the 1830s, wrote to me from London on April 22, 1860:

"Dear Citizen,

"I cannot let the occasion pass without protesting about a passage in the monstrous tissue of lies and the infamous calumnies of Vogt's pamphlet which concerns me personally. I am referring to the statement in Document No. 7, printed in the supplement to the Schweizer Handels-Courier, No. 150, of June 2, where it says: 'We know that at this very time fresh efforts are being made from London. Letters signed by A. Sch are being sent from there to both associations and individuals, etc' These 'letters' appear to be the reason why Herr K. Vogt wrote elsewhere in his book: 'At the beginning of this year (1859) a new arena for political agitation seemed to be opening up. The opportunity was seized in a moment so as to regain some influence if possible. The tactics have not altered in this respect for years. A committee about which "no-one knows nothing", as it says in the old song, circulates letters through an equally unknown president or secretary, etc., etc. Having reconnoitred the terrain in this manner, a number of "travelling brethren" turn up in the country and at once start to organise a secret league. The association which is to be compromised learns nothing of these goings-on which remain the work of a number of sectarian individuals. For the most part even the correspondence conducted in the name of the association remains quite unknown to it, but the letters refer always to "our association", etc., and the inquiries of the police, which follow inexorably, and are based on documents that have fallen into their hands, always affect the association as a whole, etc'

"Why did Herr K. Vogt not print the whole letter which he alludes to in Document No. 7? Why not 'reconnoitre' the source he has relied on for his information? It would have been easy for him to discover that the public Workers' Educational Society in London chose its correspondence committee, to which I had the honour to be elected, in open session. When Herr Vogt speaks of unknown secretaries and the like, I am very pleased to be unknown to him, but am happy to be able to say that I am known to thousands of German workers, who have all derived benefit from the erudition of the men whom he vilifies now. Times have changed. The period of secret societies is past. It is ridiculous to talk of secret leagues or sects, when problems are dealt with openly in a workers' society, where strangers attend as visitors at every meeting. The letters signed by me were so formulated that it was impossible for anyone to come to harm in consequence. We German workers in London had only one interest at heart and that was to learn about the mood of the workers' associations on the Continent, and to found a newspaper which would represent the interests of the working class and which would do battle with writers in the pay of the enemy. It naturally did not occur to a single German worker to act in the interests of a Bonaparte, a thing of which only a Vogt or people of his kind are capable. We undoubtedly hate the despotism of Austria with a far deeper loathing than Herr Vogt, but we do not seek its defeat in the victory of another despot. Every people must liberate itself. Is it not striking that Herr Vogt arrogates for himself the very means which he accuses us of having used against his own activities? Herr Vogt asserts that he is not in the pay of Bonaparte, and that he only received money to set up a newspaper from democratic sources. In saying this he hopes to exonerate himself, but how can he



**[p. 317]**

"With my most sincere respects,

A. Scherzer"

9. BLIND'S ARTICLE IN THE FREE PRESS OF MAY 27, 1859a

"The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary "A Correspondent, who encloses his card, writes as follows: — "Sir,—Having been present at the last meeting in the Music Hall, I heard the statement made concerning the Grand Duke Constantine. I am able to give you another fact: —

"So far back as last summer, Prince Jérôme-Napoléon detailed to some of his confidants at Geneva a plan of attack against Austria, and prospective rearrange- ment of the map of Europe. I know the name of a Swiss senator to whom he broached the subject. Prince Jérôme, at that time, declared that, according to the plan made, Grand Duke Constantine was to become King of Hungary.

"I know further of attempts made, in the beginning of the present year, to win over to the Russo-Napoleonic scheme some of the exiled German Democrats, as well as some influential Liberals in Germany. Large pecuniary advantages were held out to them as a bribe. I am glad to say that these offers were rejected with indignation." b

10. HERR ORGES' LETTERS

"Dear Sir,

"I heard today from Herr Liebknecht that you would be kind enough to put a legal document at our disposal, relating to the origins of the pamphlet against Vogt.c May I ask you urgently to send it to us as quickly as possible, so that we can produce it in court. Please, send the document against a receipt and charge us for any expenses you may have incurred. Incidentally, my dear Sir, the liberal party sometimes misjudges the Allgemeine Zeitung. We (the editors) have gone through fire and water and have passed all the tests of political commitment. If you do not consider the separate piece of work, the individual article, but our whole activity you will probably come to realise that no German newspaper strives as we do, without haste, but without rest, for unity and freedom, power and culture, for spiritual and material progress, for greater patriotic awareness and higher moral standards of the German nation, and that no paper achieves more than ours. You should judge our deeds by their effects. Asking you once more most urgendy to grant my request, and assuring you of my greatest respect,

"Yours sincerely,

Hermann Orges "Augsburg, 16/10"

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 122-24.— Ed. b Marx quotes this report in English.— Ed. c See this volume, pp. 119-24.— Ed.





**[p. 318]**

11. CIRCULAR AGAINST K. BLIND

I include here only the concluding section of my circular against Blind of February 4, 1860, which was written in English3:

"Now, before taking any further step, I want to show up the fellows who evidently have played into the hands of Vogt. I, therefore, publicly declare that the statement of Blind, Wiehe and Hollinger, according to which the anonymous pamphlet was not printed in Hollinger's office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, is a deliberate lie. First, Mr. Vögele, one of the compositors, formerly employed by Hollinger, will declare upon oath that the said pamphlet was printed in Hollinger's office, was written in the hand-writing of Mr. Blind, and partly composed by Hollinger himself. Secondly, it can be judicially proved that the pamphlet and the article in Das Volk have been taken off the same types. Thirdly, it will be shown that Wiehe was not employed by Hollinger for eleven consecutive months, and, especially, was not employed by him at the time of the pamphlet's publication. Lastly, witnesses may be summoned in whose presence Wiehe himself confessed having been persuaded by Hollinger to sign the wilfully false declaration in the Augsburg Gazette.h Consequently, I again declare the above said Charles Blind to be a deliberate liar.

Karl Marx"

From the London "Times", February 3rd.

"Vienna, January 30th.— The Swiss Professor Vogt pretends to know that France will procure for Switzerland Faucigny, Chablais, and the Genevese,«-' the neutral provinces of Savoy, if the Grand Council of the Republic will let her have the free use of the Simplon."d

a Marx quotes this excerpt from the circular in English (see this volume, pp. 10-11).— Ed.

b The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung.— Ed. c Genevois.— Ed. d Marx quotes this report in English (see also this volume, p. 195).— Ed.



**[p. 319]**

"I declare herewith: that the German flysheet Zur Warnung (A Warning) which was afterwards reprinted in No. 7 (d.d. 18th June 1859) of Das Volk (a German paper which was then published in London) and which was again reprinted in the Allgemeine Zeitung of Augsburg (the Augsburg Gazette)—that this flysheet was composed partly by Mr. Fidelio Hollinger of 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, London, partly by myself, who was then employed by Mr. Fidelio Hollinger, and that the flysheet was published in Mr. F. Hollinger's Printing office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, London; that the manuscript of the said flysheet was in the handwriting of Mr. Charles Blind; that I saw Mr. F. Hollinger give to Mr. William Liebknecht of 14, Church Street, Soho, London, the proof sheet of the flysheet Zur Warnung; that Mr. F. Hollinger hesitated at first giving the proofsheet to Mr. W. Liebknecht, and, that, when Mr. W. Liebknecht had withdrawn, he, Mr. F. Hollinger, expressed to me, and to my fellow workman J. F. Wiehe, his regret for having given the proofsheet out of his hands.

"Declared at the Police Court, Bow Street, in the County of Middlesex, the eleventh day of February 1860, before me, Th. Henry, one of the Police Magistrates of the Metropolis.

"L.S. A. Vögele" *

13. WIEHE'S AFFIDAVIT

"One of the first days of November last—I do not recollect the exact date—in the evening between nine and ten o'clock I was taken out of bed by Mr. F. Hollinger, in whose house I then lived, and by whom I was employed as compositor. He presented to me a paper to the effect, that, during the preceding eleven months I had been continuously employed by him, and that during all that time a certain German flysheet Zur Warnung (A Warning) had not been composed and printed in Mr. Hollinger's Office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho. In my perplexed state, and not aware of the importance of the transaction, I complied with his wish, and copied, and signed the document. Mr. Hollinger promised me money, but I never received anything. During that transaction Mr. Charles Blind, as my wife informed me at the time, was waiting in Mr. Hollinger's room. A few days later, Mrs. Hollinger called me down from dinner and led me into her husband's room, where I found Mr. Charles Blind alone. He presented me the same paper which Mr. Hollinger had presented me before, and entreated me to write, and sign a second copy, as he wanted two, the one for himself, and the other for publication in the Press. He added that he would show himself grateful to me. I copied and signed again the paper.

"I herewith declare the truth of the above statement* and that: "1) During the 11 months mentioned in the document I was for six weeks not employed by Mr. Hollinger, but by a Mr. Ermani. 2) I did not work in Mr. Hollinger's Office just at that time when the flysheet Zur Warnung (A Warning) was published. 3) I heard at the time from Mr. Vögele, who then worked for Mr. Hollinger, that he, Vögele, had, together with Mr. Hollinger himself, composed the flysheet in question, and that the manuscript was in Mr. Blind's handwriting. 4) The types of the pamphlet were still standing when I returned to Mr. Hollinger's service. I myself broke them into columns for the reprint of the

[^1]: a Marx gives this document in English (see also this volume, p. 128).— Ed.





**[p. 320]**

"Declared and signed by the said Johann Friedrich Wiehe at the Police Court, Bow Street, this 8th day of February, 1860, before me Th. Henry, Magistrate of the said court.

"L.S. Johann Friedrich Wiehe"*

14. FROM THE TRIAL PAPERS

" Gouvernement Provisoire

République Française. Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité.

Au nom du Peuple Français

"Paris, 1 Mars 1848

"Brave et loyal Marx,

"Le sol de la république française est un champ d'asile pour tous les amis de la liberté. La tyrannie vous a banni, la France libre vous rouvre ses portes, à vous et à tous ceux qui combattent pour la cause sainte, la cause fraternelle de tous les peuples. Tout agent du gouvernement français doit interpréter sa mission dans ce sens. Salut et fraternité.

"Bruxelles, le 19 Mai 1848

"Mon cher Monsieur Marx, "J'entends avec un grand plaisir par notre ami Weerth que vous allez faire paraître à Cologne une Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane dont il m'a remis le prospectus. Il

"Paris, March 1, 1848

"Honest, worthy Marx,

"The soil of the French Republic is a place of asylum for all the friends of freedom. Tyranny has expelled you, a free France opens its doors to you once more, to you and to all those who fight for the sacred cause, the fraternal cause of all the peoples. Every official of the French Government should interpret his task in this sense. With fraternal greetings.

Ferdinand Flocon, Member of the Provisional Government."—Ed.

[^1]: Ferdinand Flocon, Membre du gouvernement provisoire"b

[^2]: a Marx gives this document in English (see also this volume, pp. 129-30).— Ed. b "Provisional Government French Republic. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. In the name of the French People





**[p. 321]**

a "My dear Mr. Marx, I hear with great pleasure from our friend Weerth that you intend to publish a Neue Rheinische Zeitung in Cologne of which he has sent me the prospectus. It is extremely necessary for this paper to keep us in Belgium informed about the affairs of German democracy, since it is not possible to learn anything definite about this from the Kölnische Zeitung, the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung and the other aristocratic German papers which we receive here in Brussels, any more than from our Indépendance Belge, all of whose special reports are written from the standpoint of the interests of our bourgeois aristocracy. Herr Weerth has told me that he is going to join you in Cologne to collaborate on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and he has promised me in your name to send me copies of it in exchange for the Débat social which I shall forward to you. I can ask nothing better than to correspond with you about the affairs common to our two nations. It is in the interest of both our countries that Belgians and Germans should become better acquainted with each other, for in France events are about to take place which in a short time will pose problems affecting both our countries. I have just come back

[^1]: L. Jottrand, Avt." a





**[p. 322]**

"Mon cher Marx, "N'ayant pas de vos nouvelles, depuis très longtemps, j'ai reçu votre dernière3

avec la plus vive satisfaction. Vous vous plaignez du retard des choses, et du peu d'empressement de ma part de vous répondre à la question que vous m'aviez faite. Que faire: l'âge ralentit la plume; j'espère cependant que vous trouverez mes avis et mon sentiment toujours les mêmes. Je vois que votre ..dernière est tracée à la dictée par la main de votre secrétaire intime, de votre adorable moitié: or Madame Marx ne cesse de se rappeler du vieux hermite de Bruxelles. Qu'elle daigne recevoir avec bonté mes salutations respectueuses.

"Conservez-moi, cher confrère, dans vos amitiés. Salut et fraternité.

Lelewel" b

from Paris after spending ten days there during which time I did my best to gain an understanding of what is happening in this great metropolis. At the end of my stay I found myself in the midst of the events of May 15. I was even present at the session of the National Assembly during which the people rushed into the Chamber As far as I have understood both from seeing the attitude of the people of Paris and from listening to the speeches of the leading statesmen in the French Republic at the present time, a powerful reaction is expected against the events of February last on the part of the bourgeoisie; the events of May 15 will doubtless hasten this reaction. And this will undoubtedly lead in a short time to a new uprising by the people France will soon have to have recourse to war. It is for this reason that we ought to consider here and in your country what common action we should take in that event. If to start with the war is directed against Italy we shall have a breathing space; but if it is directed against this country from the very beginning I do not yet know what we should do, and we should then be in need of the advice of the Germans In the meantime I shall announce the approaching publication of your new paper in the Sunday edition of the Débat social I plan to go to London towards the end of June. Should you have occasion to write to any of your friends in London, I would be grateful if you could ask them to receive me kindly.

"With cordial greetings,

L. Jottrand, Lawyer" See also this volume, pp. 263-66.— Ed.

a This refers to Marx's letter to Lelewel of February 3, 1860 (present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed.

b "My dear Marx, not having heard any news from you for a long time, I was very glad to receive your last communication. You complain about the delay and the lack of urgency on my part in answering the question you put to me. But what can one do: age slows down the pen. Nevertheless, I hope that you will find my opinions and my feelings the same as ever. I see that your last letter was written at your dictation by the hand of your private secretary, your charming wife. So Madame Marx still remembers the old hermit in Brussels. Please, convey to her my respectful greetings.

"Continue to include me, dear colleague, among your friends. With fraternal greetings.

Lelewel".—-Ed.



**[p. 323]**

"My dear Marx,

"I have read a series of infamous articles against you in the National-Zeitung and am utterly astonished at the falsehood and malignity of the writer. I really feel it a duty that every one who is acquainted with you, should, however unnecessary such a testimony must be, pay a tribute to the worth, honour and disinterestedness of your character. It becomes doubly incumbent in me to do so, when I recollect how many articles you contributed to my little magazine, the Notes to the People, and subsequently to the People's Paper, for a series of years, utterly gratuitously; articles which were of such high value to the people's cause, and of such great benefit to the paper. Permit me to hope that you will severely punish your dastardly and unmanly libeller.

"Believe me, my dear Marx, most sincerely, yours,

Ernest Jones "Dr. Karl Marx" 3

"Tribune Office, New York, March 8th, 1860

"My dear Sir,

"In reply to your request I am very happy to state the facts of your connection with various publications in the United States concerning which I have had a personal knowledge. Nearly nine years ago I engaged you to write for the New York Tribune, and the engagement has been continued ever since. You have written for us constantly, without a single week's interruption, that I can remember; and you are not only one of the most highly valued, but one of the best paid contributors attached to the journal. The only fault I have had to find with you has been that you have occasionally exhibited too German a tone of feeling for an American newspaper. This has been the case with reference both to Russia and France. In questions relating to both, Czarism and Bonapartism, I have sometimes thought that you manifested too much interest and too great anxiety for the unity and independence of Germany. This was more striking perhaps in connection with the late Italian war than on any other occasion. In that I agreed perfectly with you: sympathy with the Italian people. I had as little confidence as you in the sincerity of the French Emperor, and believed as little as you that Italian liberty was to be expected from him; but I did not think that Germany had any such ground for alarm as you, in common with other patriotic Germans, thought she had.

"I must add that in all your writings which have passed through my hands, you have always manifested the most cordial interest in the welfare and progress of the labouring classes; and that you have written much with direct reference to that end.

"I have also at various times within the past five or six years been the medium through which contributions of yours have been furnished to Putnam's Monthly,247 a literary magazine of high character; and also to the New American Cyclopaedia, of which I am also an editor, and for which you have furnished some very important articles.

[^1]: a Marx gives the letter in English.— Ed.





**[p. 324]**

Charles A. Dana, Managing Editor of the N. Y. Tribune

"Dr. Charles Marx" 3

15. DENTU PAMPHLETS

I have shown that the Dentu pamphlets are the source from which the German Dâ-Dâ derives his wisdom about world history in general and "Napoleon's salutary policy" in particular. The "salutary policy of Napoleon" is a phrase from a recent leading article by "democrat" F. Zabel. What the French themselves think and know about these pamphlets can be seen from the following extract from the Paris weekly, the Courrier du Dimanche, No. 42, of October 14, 1860.

"Pour ce qui regarde le moment actuel, prenez dix brochures au hasard, et vous reconnaîtrez que neuf au moins ont été pensées, élaborées, écrites par qui? par des romanciers de profession, par des chansonniers, par des vaudevillistes, par des sacristains!

"Parle-t-on dans les gazettes de mystérieuses entrevues entre les puissances du Nord, de la Sainte-Alliance qui ressuscite? Vite voilà un faiseur agréable de couplets assez littéraires, et même (jadis) passablement libéraux, qui court chez l'inévitable M. Dentu et lui apporte sous ce titre ronflant: La coalition, une longue et fade paraphrase des articles de M. Grandguillot. L'alliance anglaise semble déplaire parfois à M. Limayrac? Vite, un M. Châtelet, chevalier de l'ordre de Grégoire le Grand,248 et qui doit être sacristain quelque part, si j'en crois son style, publie ou republie un long et ridicule factum: Crimes et délits de l'Angleterre contre la France. Déjà l'auteur du Compère Guillery (Edmond About) avait jugé à propos de nous édifier sur les arcanes politiques de la monarchie prussienne, et avait donné du haut de ses chutes théâtrales, des conseils de prudence aux chambres de Berlin. On annonce que M. Clairville va prochainement élucider la question de l'isthme de Panama, si fort embrouillée par M. Belly; et sans doute quelques jours après la conférence royale du 21 Octobre,249 on verra paraître à toutes les vitrines de nos libraires une splendide brochure rose qui portera ce titre: Mémoire sur l'entrevue de Varsovie par le corps de ballet de l'Opéra.

"Cette invasion, en apparence inexplicable, des questions politiques par les dii minores de la littérature, se rattache à bien des causes. Nous en citerons ici une seule, mais qui est la plus immédiate et la plus incontestable.

"Dans le marasme presque universel d'esprit et de coeur, ces messieurs, qui font le triste métier d'amuseurs publics, ne savent plus par quel moyen secouer et réveiller leurs lecteurs. Les vieilles gaîtés de leurs refrains et de leurs anecdotes leur reviennent sans cesse. Eux-mêmes se sentent aussi mornes, aussi tristes, aussi ennuyés que ceux qu'ils entreprennent de dérider. Voilà pourquoi à bout de ressources, ils se sont mis, en désespoir de cause, à écrire les uns des mémoires de courtisanes, les autres des brochures diplomatiques.

"Puis, un beau matin, un aventurier de la plume, qui n'a jamais fait à la politique le sacrifice d'une heure sérieuse d'étude, qui n'a pas même au coeur le

[^1]: a Marx gives the letter in English.— Ed.





**[p. 325]**

"Est-il nécessaire de dire, après cela, ce que valent les brochures qui nous inondent? Ramassez un jour tout ce que vous avez de courage, tâchez de les lire jusqu'au bout et vous serez effrayés de l'ignorance inouïe, de la légèreté intolérable, voire même de l'amoindrissement de •.ens moral qu'elles décèlent dans leurs auteurs. Et je ne parle pas ici des plus mauvaises Et chaque année nous courbe plus bas, chaque année voit apparaître un nouveau signe de décadence intellectuelle, chaque année ajoute une honte littéraire nouvelle à celles dont il nous faut déjà rougir. De telle sorte que les plus optimistes se prennent quelquefois à douter de demain, et se demandent avec angoisse: Sortirons-nous de là?" a

1 "As to the present state of affairs, pick any ten pamphlets at random and you will find that at least nine of them have been devised worked out and written by whom? By professional novelists, song-writers, vauceville-vvriters or sextons.

"If the newspapers mention mysterious meetings between the northern powers or a project to resurrect the Hoiv Alliance, Immediately some amiable person manufacturing fairly literary songs, and even (formerly) passably liberal songs, will run off to the inevitable M. Dentu and supply him, under the resounding title: "La Coalition', with a lengthy and insipid paraphrase of the articles of M. Grandguil- !ot. If the alliance with England seems sometimes to disolease M. Limayrac, a M. Châtelet, knight of the Order of Gregory the Great, and a man who must be a sexton somewhere or other, to judge him by his stvle, quickly publishes or republishes a long, ridiculous account: Crimes et délits de l'Angleterre contre la France.

The author of Compère Guillery (Edmona About) has already deemed it expedient to edifv us with stories about the political secrets of the Prussian monarchv and

"«m i,ie heights ot his theatrical fiascos he has nonoured the Chambers of Berlin

i; is ->ru(.< nt ..u\ice. Tt has been announced that M. Clairviile will soon . r1 in o iio Heni •>{ the Isthmus of Panama which has been so thoroughly •' . < !!' and no doubt a :ew days after the royai conference oi' -\* (' " i .ail see in the windows oi ail our bookshops a spienaid pink • armg the title: Mémoire sur l'entrevue de Varsovie par ie corps de ballet de

r ' it.i L^ inexplicable invasion of the political arena by the lesser gods of • 01 dime ' «»•> aianv causes. We shall only mention one here, but that one is the most palpable and the most indisputable of all.



**[p. 326]**

"Paris, November 8 Louis-Napoleon spends his gold in vain in supporting such newspapers as the National-Zeitung." (Manchester Guardian of November 12, I860.)3

"Amidst the almost universal decline of intellect and heart, the gentlemen who have the dreary task of amusing the public are at a loss for the means to astonish and rouse their readers. They continually reproduce the old jokes of their refrains and their anecdotes. They are themselves as depressed, as melancholy and as bored as those whom they undertake to cheer up. This is why out of sheer despair, when they have come to their wits' end, some of them begin to write the memoirs of courtesans, and others diplomatic pamphlets.

"Then, one fine morning, an adventurer of the pen who has never sacrificed a single hour of serious study to politics, who does not even have the ghost of a genuine conviction of any sort in his heart, gets out of bed and says to himself: '1 must strike a great blow! Let's see. what shall I do to attract the notice of the general public which instinctively ignores me? Shall I write an article on the Leotard affair or on the Eastern Question? Shall I reveal to an astonished world the secrets of boudoirs which I have never entered, or the mysteries of Russian politics of which I know even less? Shall I melt with emotion in the Voltairean manner about the faie of fallen women, or bewail in Biblical prose the wretched Maronite population persecuted, plundered and slaughtered by Moslem fanaticism? Shall I sing the praises of Mademoiselle Rigolboche or pen an apologia of temporal power? I have it: I shall settle for politics. I shall entertain my public better with kings and emperors than with loose women.' Having said which, our supernumer- ary of the literary Bohème wades through the Moniteur, hangs around the colonnades of the Stock Exchange for several days, visits a few officials and in the end he knows which way the wind of the town's curiosity is blowing, or the direction of the favour of the Court. He then selects a title capable of capturing a sufficient portion of this wind, whereupon he rests on his laurels. He has now done everything necessary: for these days only two things are needed to make a pamphlet: the title and the relations thai may be supposed to exist between the author and people in high places'.

"Is it stili necessarv. after all this, to speak of the value of the pamphlets which are flooding the market? If one day you pluck up all your courage and try to read them right through to the end you will be appalled by the extraordinary ignorance. the unbearable frivoiousness and especially the utter debasement of moral principles tiiai thev reveal in their authors. And I am not speaking of the worst of them And even year sees the standard sink still lower, every year brings new evidence oi intellectual decadence, every year brings a new literary dishonour to add to those which already make us blush. Things have come to such a pass tha even the greates. optimists sometimes wonder what the morrow will bring and anxiously ask themselves: Shall we ever be able to escape from all this?"—Ed.

a Marx quotes the passage from The Manchester Guardian in English and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.



**[p. 327]**

16. POSTSCRIPT

a) K. VOGT AND LA CIMENTAIRE

While the last of these pages were being printed, I accidentally came across the October issue (1860) of the Stimmen der Zeit.

A. Kolatschek, the former publisher of the Deutsche Monatsschrift, the organ of the refugee parliamentarians, and hence, in a manner of speaking, the literary superior of the "fugitive Regent of the Empire", tells the following story about his friend Karl Vogt

on p. 37:

"The Geneva joint-stock company, La Cimentaire, which numbered none other than Herr Karl Vogt himself among its directors, was founded in 1857. By 1858 the shareholders were down to their last farthing and the public prosecutor immediately put one of the directors in gaol on charges of fraud. At the time of the arrest Herr Vogt happened to be away in Berne; he returned in haste, the man who had been arrested was set at liberty, the charges were suppressed 'for fear of causing a scandal', but the shareholders lost everything. But after such an example as this it cannot really be maintained that property is very well protected in Geneva and the error of Herr Karl Vogt in this respect is all the stranger since he was, as we have mentioned, one of the directors of the company concerned. And even in France in similar cases it is customary to search for the culprits among the directors, to put them into gaol and to use their property to satisfy the civil claims of the shareholders."

This should be compared with the account given by Joh. Ph. Becker in his letter (in Chapter X) about the bank incident which drove M. James Fazy into the arms of the Decembrists.3 Such details as this are a great help in solving the riddle of how "Napoleon le Petit" became the greatest man of his age. As is well known "Napoléon le

Petit" himself had to choose between a coup d'état and—Clichy.251

The following excerpt from a memorandum of a conversation with Kossuth proves incontrovertibly that Kossuth knows perfectly well that it is Russia that constitutes the greatest threat to

[^1]: b) KOSSUTH

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 230-35.— Ed.

[^3]: 12-1305





**[p. 328]**

"Memorandum of a conversation with M. Kossuth on the evening of May 30th, 1854, at

" A return to strict legality in Hungary (said he, viz. Kossuth) might renew the union of Hungary and Austria, and would prevent Russia from finding any partisan in Hungary. He (Kossuth) would not offer any opposition to a return to legality. He would advise his countrymen to accept with good faith such a restoration, if it could be obtained, and would pledge himself not in any way to be an obstacle to such an arrangement. He would not himself return to Hungary. He would not him- self put forward such a course for Austria as he had no belief in Austria's return to legality, except under pressure of dire necessity. He gave me authority to say, such were his sentiments, and if appealed to, he would avow them, though he could not commit himself to any proposal, as he could not expect Austria to abandon her traditional scheme of centralisation till forced to do so He would have consented in 1848 to Hungarian troops being sent to resist attacks of the Piedmontese" (M. Kossuth went much further in 1848 since he ensured that Hungarian troops would be sent against the Italian "rebels" by delivering a violent speech in the Imperial Diet in Pest), "but would not employ them to coerce Austrian Italy, as he would not consent to foreign troops in Hungary."253

The mythopoeic power of popular fantasy has always shown itself in the creation of "great men". Simon Bolivar is undeniably the most convincing illustration of this. As for Kossuth, he is, for example, celebrated as the man who abolished feudalism in Hungary. Nevertheless he is in no way connected with the three great measures: universal taxation, the abolition of the feudal burden of the peasantry and the abolition without compensation of the tithes paid to the Church. The motion for universal taxation (the nobility having previously been exempt) was put by Szemere; the motion to do away with corvée, etc., by Bonis, the deputy for Szabolcz, and the clergy itself, acting through Jekelfalussy, a deputy and a canon, voluntarily relinquished its rights to raise tithes.254

At the end of Chapter VIII I expressed the opinion that E. About1?, pamphlet La Prusse en 1860, or as it was originally called, Napoléon III et la Prusse, was a retranslation into French of an excerpt of Dâ-Dâ Vogt's German compilation of the Dentu pamphlets.0 The only objection to this view was the total ignorance

[^1]: c) EDMOND ABOUT'S LA PRUSSE EN 1860

[^2]: a William Sandford.— Ed. b Marx uses the English term and gives the text of the memorandum, which follows, in English too.— Ed.

[^3]: c See this volume, pp. 182-83.— Ed





**[p. 329]**

compère Guillery is none other than Vogt's gentle Kunigunde—Herr Ludwig Simon of Trier. This was hardly suspected by the German refugee in London d who penned the well-known answer to About's pamphlet/

a Compère—godfather, commère allemande—German godmother.— Ed. h "A very useful ally, who is still ready to render her" (Prussia) "great service, provided that she will help herself."—Ed.

c See this volume, pp. 211-12.— Ed. d S. L. Borkheim.— Ed. e Napoleon III und Preussen. Antwort eines deutschen Flüchtlings auf die Broschüre "Preussen in 1860" von Edmond About, London, 1860.— Ed.

[^1]: 12*



