---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "1. Schily's Expulsion from Switzerland "
Page_Range: "321-328"
---

# 1. Schily's Expulsion from Switzerland 



**[p. 296]**

XII

APPENDICES

1. SCHILY'S EXPULSION FROM SWITZERLAND

A letter from Schily about his expulsion from Switzerland which exemplifies the treatment meted out to non-pariiamentary ref- ugees234 can unfortunately only be printed in extract, owing to lack of space. The letter begins by recounting how two German refugees, B. and I.,a both friends of Schily, left Geneva, were arrested during their journey through Switzerland and, having been liberated by Druey, returned again to Geneva.

"At their request," Schily continues, "I went to Fazy to find out whether anyone was looking for them and he reassured me by saying that there was no reason at Cantonal level to disturb their incognito and that no inquiries about them had reached him at Federal level either. I would do well, however, to have an interview with the chef du département de justice et de police, M. Girard, mentioning his name and what he had told me. This Î did with more or iess the same success and leaving my address behind in case there were any Federal inquiries. A few weeks later I was visited by a police officer who requested me to give him the address of B. and I. I refused, hurried around to the aforementioned Girard and upon being threatened by him with expulsion unless I gave him the address, I explained to him that according to our previous agreement 1 couid be appealed to as an

intermédiaire, but not as a dénonciateur. To which he replied: 'Vous avez i'air de vouloir vous interposer comme ambassadeur entre moi et ces réfugiés, pour traiter de puissance à puissance.'b I replied: 'Je n'ai pas ('ambition d'être accrédité ambassadeur près de vous.'0 And in fact I was then dismissed without any of the ceremony to which ambassadors are entitled. On my way home ' learnt that B. and I. had just been discovered, and that they had been arrested and led off so that Ï could regard Girard's threat as superseded by events. But I had reckoned without April 1, for on this ominous day in 1852 1 was requested bv a police officer, ::i rhe middle of the street, to accompany him to the Hôtel de Ville, where some uuestions

c "I have no ambition to become an ambassador accredited to you."—Ed.

[^1]: a Elard Biscamp and Peter ïmandt.— Ed. b "It looks as if you would like to act the ambassador between me and these refugees, to mediate as between equal powers.''—Ed.





**[p. 297]**

latus* to Trog, his counterpart at Federal level, who happened to be in Geneva at the time, that I was expelled and that he must send me to Berne without delay; all of this to his greatest regret, since there was no complaint against me at Cantonal level, but the Federal Commissar insisted on my expulsion. To my request to be allowed to see the latter he replied: 'Non, nous ne voulons pas que le commissaire fédéral fasse la police ici.'b This statement, of course, contradicted his earlier one and in general he now abandoned his role of Genevan State Councillor, which consisted in resisting Federal demands for expulsion with liberal prudery, in yielding only to force, sometimes also yielding, with pleasure or resignation, to the application of gentle pressure.0 Another feature of this role was to noise it abroad that the person expelled was a spy and that it had been necessary to remove him in the interests of the 'good cause' Thus Tourte told the refugees afterwards that he had had to get rid of me because I was in league with the Federal Commissar, together with whom I had sought to frustrate his (Tourte's) measures to protect the refugees, i.e. that I was in league with the same Commissar who, much to his regret, had given orders to expel me. Quelles tartines!à What lies and contradictions! And all for a little aura popularise Of course, wind is what that gentleman uses to keep his balloon airborne. Grand Councillor and State Councillor of Geneva, member of the Swiss Council of States or National Council, a born Counsellor of Confusion, he needs only to become a member of the Federal Council to ensure that Switzerland will enjoy peaceful days in accordance with the saying: Providentia

Dei et confusione hominum Helvetia salva fuit."f

On arriving in London Schily sent a letter of protest about Tourte's slander to the Genevan Indépendant, which was under the influence of Raisin, whom we shall mention later, and which had shortly before printed a scathing attack on the assinine slanderous fabrications with which "the liberal faiseurs* were driving the refugees out of Switzerland". His letter was not published.

"From the Hôtel de Ville in Geneva," Schily continues, "I was transferred to gaol, and on the following day I was sent by mail coach to Berne with a police guard. There M. Druey held me in close confinement for two weeks in the so-called Old Tower"

In his correspondence with the imprisoned Schily, which we shall refer to in due course, Druey placed all the guilt on the Canton of Geneva, while for his part Tourte had asserted that the entire responsibility lay with the Federal authorities, since there was

a Assistant.— Ed. b "No, we don't want the Federal Commissar playing the policeman here."—Ed. c Marx uses English: "gentle pressure".— Ed, d What follies!— Ed. e Whiff of popularity (a phrase from Cicero's De haruspicum responso, 20, 43).— Ed. { The providence of God and the confusion of man have been the salvation of Switzerland.— Ed.

g Busybodies.— Ed.

[^1]: 11*





**[p. 298]**

"On the occasion of the Federal Shooting Competition which was held in Geneva in the summer of 1851, Raisin had taken over the editorship of the Journal du tir federal, which appeared in French and German. He engaged me to work on the paper, promising me a fee of 300 francs in exchange for which I was supposed inter alia to record flagrante delicto3 the opening and closing speeches in German of the President of the Committee Tourte. I owe a debt of gratitude to Tourte for having made my task much easier by his habit of addressing more or less the same enthusiastic words to the various deputations of marksmen, varying his phrases slightly according to whether he was eulogising the Bear of Berne, the Bull of Uri,b

or other members of the Confederation. In particular, when he would come to the refrain 'But if the moment of danger ever arrives, then we shall, etc.', I would calmly lay down my pen and when Raisin asked why, I could answer: c'est le refrain

du danger, je le sais par coeur.c Instead of my hard-earned fee of 300 francs, I managed only to extract 100 from Raisin, and only with the greatest difficulty although he did open up the prospect of collaborating on a political review he intended to establish in Geneva in order to be independent of all the existing parties and be able to oppose any side and especially the then 'liberal' government of Fazy and Tourte, even though he belonged to it himself. He was the very man for such an enterprise — able, as he used to boast, 'd'arracher la peau à qui que ce soit'd .Accordingly, he commissioned me to establish contacts for this journal in the course of a journey through Switzerland which I undertook after my Federal Shooting labours. I did so and on my return I drew up a written report on the results achieved. In the meantime, however, the wind had begun to blow from another direction and he found himself returning full sail from his expedition of piracy into the peaceful harbour of the existing government. J'en étais donc pour mes frais et honoraires,e for which I vainly pestered him and continue to do so to this day, and have still received nothing even though he is now a wealthy man Shortly before my arrest he asserted categorically that there was no question of my being expelled, his friend Tourte had himself assured him that it was not necessary for me to take any preventive measures with regard to Girard's threats, etc. In reply to a letter which I sent him de profundis,{ from my old prison tower, asking him for a small instalment of the money he owed me and for an explanation of the incident (my arrest, etc.), he preserved a stubborn silence, even though he assured the person who brought him the message that he would comply with all my requests

"A few months later I received a letter from K.,§ a reliable, unprejudiced man, informing me that my expulsion had been the work of the refugee parliament

a In the very act of committing an offence.— Ed. h An allusion to the arms of the Cantons of Berne and Uri.— Ed. c "It is the refrain about danger, I know it by heart." — Ed. ^ "To skin a man alive." — Ed. e That was the last I heard of my expenses and fees.— Ed. f Literally: out of the depths. Figuratively: from a state of extreme suffering (Psalms 130T).— Ed.

s Presumably a letter from Friedrich Kamm written in 1852.— Ed.

entre poire et fromage}3 would savagely devour both his mummy and the reincarnated form to the horror of those present. It is true that I was no admirer of the parliamentarians' deeds, quite the reverse! But is it likely that these gentlemen intended to punish me for this by an Imperial ban—regarding Switzerland as part of the Empire because both the Imperial Constitution and the most recent resolution of the Imperial Diet lie buried there? I think it more likely that the presumption of their persecution of myself is connected with the parliamentary rebellion mentioned in my previous letterc against the Geneva Refugee Committee formed by myself, Becker and a number of Genevan citizens Why these gentlemen wished to usurp the right to distribute the refugee funds was a matter about which even they differed among themselves. Some of them, among them Dentzel from the little Chamber of Baden, preferred, contrary to our practice of giving aid above all to penniless workers, to wipe away the tears of professional sufferers, heroes of the revolution, patriotic sons of the nation, who had seen better days Is fecit cui prodest,d as the saying goes in the trade, and since my activities were, it is true, inconvenient to these gentlemen, the suspicion arose that they had made use of their influence in important places to bring about my removal. It was known that they had the aurem principise or, at any rate, they were close enough to it to whisper something or other about my restiveness, and that princeps Tourte especially had frequently gathered them around himself"

Having described how he was moved from the Old Tower in Berne to Basle and then over the French frontier, Schily continues:

"As far as the expense entailed in expelling refugees is concerned, I cherish the hope that the costs were defrayed not by the Federal Treasury, but by that of the Holy Alliance. For one day a considerable time after our entry into Switzerland, Princess Olga was sitting at luncheon in a Berne restaurant with the Russian chargé d'affaires there.f Entre poire et fromage {sans comparaison to the terrible Reinach) Her Highness remarked to her table companion: 'Eh bien, Monsieur le baron, avez-vous encore beaucoup de réfugiés ici?' 'Pas mal, Princesse,' he replied, 'bien que nous en ayons déjà beaucoup renvoyé. M. Druey fait de son mieux à cet égard, et si de nouveaux fonds nous arrivent, nous en renverrons bien encore.'s This was overheard and passed on to me by the waiter on duty, a quondam volunteer in the Imperial campaign where he served under my august command."

a Convincingly.— Ed. b Over the dessert.— Ed. c Schily's letter of February 8, I860 (see this volume, pp. 43-46).— Ed. d He did it who benefits by it (Seneca, Medea, III, 500-01).— Ed. e Ear of the authorities.— Ed. f Pavel Alexeyevich Krüdener.— Ed. s "Well, Baron, are there still many refugees here?" "Quite a few, Your Highness, although we have already sent many of them back. M. Druey does his best in this respect, and if we receive new funds we shall be able to send back even more."—Ed.



**[p. 300]**

"It has remained a mystery to this very day how my effects could have vanished in Le Havre from the chaos of bundles accompanying a German émigré train (into which we had been incorporated in Basle by Klenk, the emigration agent, whom the Federal authorities had hired to transport us to Le Havre, with the result that all the luggage belonging to the refugees and emigrants had become hopelessly confused), unless it had been achieved with the aid of a list of the refugees and their baggage. Perhaps the Swiss Consul in Le Havre, the merchant Wanner, to whom we were sent for further transportation, knows more about it. He promised that we would be fully compensated. Druey later confirmed this promise in a letter which I sent to Advocate Vogt in Berne to enable him to pursue the matter in the Federal Council. However, I have not been able to get it back from him up to now, nor have I ever received a reply to any of the letters I wrote to him. On the other hand, in the summer of 1856 my complaint was rejected by the Federal Council and I was warned to keep the peace, without being given any reasons for this decision

"All this and all the expulsions involving so many gendarmes, handcuffs, etc., are mere trivia, however, compared to the peculiarly cosy good-neighbourly arrangement of sending home the so-called less serious offenders of the Baden campaign, providing them with special travel passes and directing them to report on their arrival to the local authorities where, instead of being allowed to resume their occupations, as they had been led to expect, they were subjected to all sorts of unexpected penances. The silent sufferings of all those extradited in this way (for extradition is the correct word) are still waiting for their chronicler and avenger.

"The Swiss Tacitus speaking of Switzerland says that it does a man credit 'if his faults may be mentioned without detracting from his greatness'. There is no lack of materials for praise of this kind; to praise Switzerland in this manner does not spoil its figure qui aime bien châtie bien? And in fact I for my part have an irrepressible love for Switzerland by and large. I like both the country and the people. Keeping a gun as part of his household equipment, always ready and skilful in using it to protect historical traditions of good repute and modern achievements of good quality, the Swiss in my eyes definitely deserves respect. He is entitled to the sympathies of others because he himself feels sympathy for others who struggle to improve their situation. 'I would rather that God had lost his best pair of angels,' a Swiss farmer said in his annoyance at the failure of the South German uprising. He might not have been prepared to risk a team of his horses for it, but he would have been more likely to risk his skin and his gun. In his heart of hearts the Swiss is not neutral, even if he practises neutrality because of, and in order to preserve, his inherited possessions. Incidentally the old crust of neutrality which cloaks his better nature will probably soon burst asunder with all these foreign feet trampling on it—for that is after all the essence of neutrality—and there will be a big bang and that will clear the air."

Thus far Schily's letter. In the Prison Tower in Berne he was not able to arrange a personal meeting with Druey, but he did manage to exchange letters with that gentleman. In reply to a letter from Schily inquiring into the reasons for his arrest and asking permission to consult his lawyer, Herr Wyss in Berne, Druey wrote on April 9, 1852:

[^1]: a He who loves well chastises well.— Ed.





**[p. 301]**

The letters which Schily was permitted, after numerous com- plaints, to write to his friends in Geneva had all to be submitted beforehand to M. Druey to inspect. In one of these letters Schily used the expression "Vae victis"P7 Druey wrote to him about it in a letter dated April 19, 1852:

"Dans le billet que vous avez adressé à M. J.,d se trouvent les mots: vae victis Cela veut-il dire que les autorités fédérales vous traitent en vaincu? S'il en était ainsi, ce serait une accusation mensongère, contre laquelle je devrais protester."e

Schily replied to the mighty Druey in a letter dated April 21, 1852:

"Je ne pense pas, M. le conseiller fédéral, que cette manière de caractériser les mesures prises à mon égard puisse me valoir le reproche d'une accusation mensongère; du moins un pareil reproche ne serait pas de nature à me faire revenir de l'idée que je suis traité avec dureté; au contraire, adressé à un prisonnier, par celui qui le tient en prison, une telle réponse me paraîtrait une dureté de plus."f

3 Marx has: "déposition".— Ed. b Marx has: "police".— Ed. c "The Genevan authorities have ordered your expulsion from the Canton; they have had you arrested and conducted to Berne and put at the disposition of my department, because you have shown yourself to be one of the most restive of the refugees and have tried to conceal the whereabouts of I. and B., of which you were obliged to inform the authorities. For this reason and because your further residence in Switzerland would have harmed the international relations of the Confederation, the Federal Council has resolved on expelling you from Swiss territory, etc. Since the purpose of your arrest was not the institution of any criminal or civil action against you, but is a measure necessitated by considerations of high politics there is no need for you to consult a lawyer. In any event before authorising the interview you request with M. Wyss, your lawyer, I should have to know for what purpose you want to consult him. "—Ed.

d Abraham Jacoby.— Ed. e "The note you have written to M. J. contains the words: vae victis Is that supposed to mean that the Federal authorities treat you as one treats a defeated opponent? If this is the implication, it is a lying accusation against which I should feel bound to protest." — Ed.

f "I do not believe, Federal Councillor, that the way in which I have described the measures taken in my regard can be thought to merit the reproach of making lying accusations; at the very least such a reproach is hardly likely to persuade me that I am not being treated harshly; on the contrary, for me as a prisoner to receive an answer like this from the person who keeps me in prison seems to be another harsh act." — Ed.



**[p. 302]**

Herr Trog was said to be busy cleaning out a nest of German communists with a brood of 84 communist dragons inside it, etc. Alongside this reactionary Genevan paper a scribbler in Berne who belonged to the parliamentary gang—it must be assumed that it was Karl Vogt since he repeatedly claims in the "Magnum Opus" that it was he who had rescued Switzerland from the clutches of the communist refugees—was busy spreading similar news in the Frankfurter Journal over the initials "ss". For example, he wrote that the Genevan Committee to aid German refugees, a committee consisting of communists, had been overthrown because of its inequitable distribution of the available funds, and that it had been replaced by upright men (namely parliamentarians) who would soon put an end to these evil practices. He wrote further that the dictator of Geneva seemed at last to be prepared to comply with the ordinances of the Federal Commissars, since two German refugees belonging to the communist faction had shortly before been put under arrest and brought from Geneva to Berne, etc.238 The Schweizerische National-Zeitung, which appears in Basle, published an answer from Geneva in its issue No. 72, of March 25, 1852, in which it said inter alia:

"Every unbiassed person knows that just as Switzerland is concerned only with the consolidation and constitutional development of its political achievements, so too the feeble remnants of the German emigration in this country are occupied entirely with earning their daily bread and other perfectly harmless pursuits, and that the fairy-tales about communism are the product of hallucinations on the part of philistines or else are concocted by politically or personally interested informers."

After the Berne parliamentary correspondent of the Frankfurter Journal had been described as one of these informers—the article concludes:

"The refugees here are of the opinion that in their ranks there are a number of so-called 'decent men' on the pattern of the former 'Biedermen and Bassermen of the Empire'3 who, driven by nostalgia for the flesh-pots of home, seek to pave the way for their own pardon at the hands of their native rulers by reactionary expectorations of this kind. We should like to send them our best wishes for a

a A pun on the names of Friedrich Karl Biedermann and Friedrich Daniel Bassermann, Biedermann means "honest man" and, in an ironical sense, "philistine". Bassermansch means "homeless tramp" or "beggar".— Ed.

