---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten "
Page_Range: "328-329"
---

# 2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten 



**[p. 303]**

Schily was known to the refugee parliamentarians as the author of this article. It appeared in the Basle National-Zeitung on March 25, and on April 1 Schily's wholly unmotivated arrest took place. "Tantaene animis caelestibus irae?"a

2. THE REVOLUTIONARY CONGRESS IN MURTEN

After the Murten scandalb the German refugees in Geneva, with the exception of the refugee parliamentarians, issued a protest addressed "To the Supreme Department of Justice and the Police of the Confederation", from which I print the following pas240 sage : " The monarchs did not rest content with their previous diplomatic gains. They rattled their sabres all around Switzerland and threatened military occupation so as to make a clean sweep of the refugees. The Federal Council at any rate has expressed its concern about this danger in an official document. And lo and behold! There were further deportations, justified this time by the notorious assembly in Murten and the claim that traces of political and propagandistic activities had been uncovered by the investigation following it. As far as the facts are concerned this claim must be categorically rejected From the legal point of view, however, it is important to bear in mind that wherever the rule of law obtains, actions proscribed by the law can only be punished by penalties laid down by the law, and this holds good for deportation too, if it is not to appear as the arbitrary action of the police. Or was perhaps here too the intention to play off diplomacy against us and to say: we have been forced to act thus out of consideration for foreign powers, in the interests of international relations? Very well, then, if this is the position, the cross of the Confederation0 should hide its head in shame before the Turkish crescent, which, when the myrmidons searching for refugees knock on the Porte,d shows its horns and does not eat humble pie.e If this is the position, then give us our passports so that we can go to Turkey and when the door has closed behind us, hand over the keys to the Swiss bastion of liberty to the Holy Alliance as a feudurn oblatum,{ and hold them in future as the insignia of chamberlains of the Holy Alliance, with the motto: Finis Helvetiae!" s

a "Can heavenly spirits cherish resentment so dire?" Virgil, Aeneid, I, 11.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 50-55.— Ed. c Switzerland's national flag.— Ed. d A pun in the original: an der Pforte klopft (literally, "knocks on the door". Pforte in German means both "door" and "the Porte", i.e. the Turkish Government).— Ed.

e In the original: nicht zu Kreuze kriecht—"does not crawl to the cross".— Ed. f Feudal fief.— Ed. s End to Switzerland! (by analogy with Finis Poloniae!—End to Poland! See p. 148 of this volume).— Ed.

