---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "3. Cherval "
Page_Range: "329-330"
---

# 3. Cherval 



**[p. 304]**

I realised from Joh. Ph. Becker's letter3 that the "associate of Marx" or the "associates" of Cherval mentioned by the Vogt of the Empireb could only be Herr Stecher, now resident in London. Up to that time I had not had the honour of making his personal acquaintance, although I had heard many complimentary descrip- tions of his great and many-sided artistic talents. In consequence of Becker's letter we met for the first time. The following is a letter from my "associate" to me.c

"17 Sussex St., London W. C. October 14, 1860

"Dear Herr Marx,

"I am glad to be able to give you some information about Nugent (Cherval-Crämer) who was mentioned in Vogt's pamphlet of which you were kind enough to send me an extract. In March 1853 I came to Geneva after a trip to Italy. Nugent arrived in Geneva at around the same time and I made his acquaintance in a lithography workshop. I had myself just taken up lithography and since Nugent had a thorough knowledge of it, and since he was extremely agreeable, energetic and industrious by nature, I accepted his proposal to share an atelier with him. What Vogt says about Nugent's activities in Geneva is roughly the same as what I heard for myself at the time, if you discount the usual exaggerations to be expected from journalists or pamphleteers. There was very little success. I knew only one of the group, a good-natured and hard-working, but otherwise imprudent and light-minded young man. And since he was one of the leaders it must be presumed that N. was everything in the group and the others nothing but curious listeners. I am convinced that neither stone nor copper plates were ever engraved, although I heard N. talk of such matters. My own acquaintances were mainly Genevans and Italians. I was aware that later on I was thought to be a spy by Vogt and other German refugees, whom I did not know. But I took no notice of it—the truth will always out. I was not even offended; it was so easy to arouse suspicion as there were spies aplenty and to discover who they were was not always a simple matter. I am almost certain that Nugent did not correspond with anyone in Geneva after he had been expelled from there. I later received two letters from him inviting me to join him in Paris to help him with a project on medieval architecture, which I did. In Paris I found Nugent to be utterly remote from politics and correspondence. AH this of course suggests that I myself could be 'the associates of Marx! since I neither saw nor heard of anyone else whom Nugent had induced to come to Paris. Of course Herr Vogt could not know that I had never had any contact with you, either direct or indirect, and that I probably never would have had, if I had not moved to London where by chance I have had the pleasure of meeting you and your esteemed family.

"With best wishes to you and your ladies,

H. Cal. Stecher"

a See this volume, pp. 60-64.— Ed. b See Carl Vogt, Mein Prozess, S. 175.— Ed. c This letter has not been found.— Ed.

