---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "4. The Communist Trial in Cologne "
Page_Range: "330-337"
---

# 4. The Communist Trial in Cologne 



**[p. 305]**

In this section I wish to make public information concerning the Prussian Embassy in London and its correspondence with Prussian authorities on the Continent during the Cologne trial. This information is based on the confessions of Hirsch which were published by A. Willich in April 1853 in the New-Yorker Criminal- Zeitung under the title "Die Opfer der Moucharderie, Rechtfer- tigungsschrift von Wilhelm Hirsch".3 Hirsch, who is at present in a Hamburg gaol, was the principal tool of Police Lieutenant Greif and his agent Fleury. It was on instructions from them and under their direction that he forged the false Minute-Book submitted as evidence by Stieber in the course of the communist trial. I give here a number of excerpts from Hirsch's memoirs.

(During the Great Exhibition) "the German associations were kept under surveillance by a police triumvirate: Police Superintendent Stieber for Prussia, a Herr Kubesch for Austria and Police Commissioner Huntel of Bremen".

Having volunteered to act as an informer, Hirsch had an interview in London with Alberts who was Secretary at the Prussian Embassy. He gives this account of their first meeting:

"The meetings of the Prussian Embassy in London with its secret agents take place at a public house well fitted for the purpose. The Cock, in Fleet St., Temple Bar, is so unobtrusive that but for a golden cock pointing to the entrance the casual passer-by would hardly notice it. I went through a narrow passage leading to the interior of this old English tavern and asked for Mr. Charles, whereupon a corpulent personage introduced himself to me with such an amiable smile that anyone seeing us would have taken us to be old friends. The Embassy agent (for this is what he was) seemed to be in very high spirits and his mood was still further improved by brandy and water. He enjoyed it so much that for a long time he seemed to have completely forgotten the purpose of our meeting. Mr. Charles at once revealed that his true name was Alberts and that he was the Embassy Secretary. To begin with, he informed me that in fact he had nothing to do with the police but that he would act as an intermediary in this case A second meeting took place at his home in 39 Brewer St., Golden Square, and it was here that I made the acquaintance of Police Lieutenant Greif. Greif looked the true policeman: medium height, dark hair and a beard of the same colour cut in the regulation style, with the moustache meeting the side-whiskers and the chin left shaven. His eyes looked anything but intelligent and they protruded fiercely in a permanent glare, apparently the result of frequent association with thieves and rogues Like Herr Alberts, Herr Greif introduced himself to me by the pseudonym of Mr. Charles. The latest Mr. Charles was at least in a more serious mood and he even felt it was necessary to test me Our first meeting ended with his instructing me to give him an accurate report on all the activities of the revolutionary émigrés On the next

a This article was published in instalments in the Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung on April 1, 8, 15 and 22, 1853. Excerpts from it are contained in Marx's notebook. For his assessment of it see his article "Hirsch's Confessions" (present edition, Vol. 12).— Ed.



**[p. 306]**

Greif left London for some time and parted from Hirsch

"expressly commending me to the latest Mr. Charles who, he said, acted always on his instructions. I should not hesitate to confide in him. Moreover, even if certain things should appear strange to me I should not be surprised. To make this clearer he added: 'The Ministry sometimes requires various things, chiefly documents; if these are unobtainable we should find some way out!"'

Hirsch states further that the latest Charles was Fleury.

"He had earlier been employed in the office of the Dresdner Zeitung, which was edited by L. Wittig. When he was in Baden, he was, as a result of recommendations he had brought from Saxony, sent by the provisional government to the Palatinate to take in hand the organisation of the Landsturm, etc. When the Prussians occupied Karlsruhe he was taken prisoner, etc. He suddenly reappeared in London towards the end of 1850 or early in 1851; from the outset he went here by the name of de Fleury and was known by this name in refugee circles. He was hard up, at least he seemed to be, stayed in the refugee barracks set up by the Refugee Committee and drew subsidies. Early in the summer of 1851 his position suddenly improved; he moved into a respectable apartment and at the end of the year he married the daughter of an English engineer. He turned up later in Paris as a police agent His real name is Krause and he is the son of Krause the cobbler who was executed some 15 or 18 years ago in Dresden together with Backhof and Beseler for the murder of Countess Schönberg and her maid Fleury-Krause told me many times that he had been working for different governments since he was 14."

It is this same Fleury-Krause whom Stieber admitted in open court in Cologne to be a secret Prussian police agent working directly under Greif. In my Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne I wrote of Fleury:

"Fleury is not indeed the Fleur de Marie of the police prostitutes, but he is a flower3 and he will bear blossom, albeit only fleurs-de-lys." *

This prophecy has in a sense been fulfilled; some months after the communist trial Fleury was sentenced in England to several years in the hulksb for forgery.

* Fleurs-de-lys [lilies] is the French colloquial name of the letters T. F. (travaux forcés, forced labour), the brand-mark of criminals. [Note by Engels to the 1885 edition of the Revelations. See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 442.]

a A pun: Fleur de Marie—the heroine in Eugène Sue's novel Les mystères de Paris, fleur—a flower.— Ed.

[^1]: b Marx uses the English word.— Ed.





**[p. 307]**

Fleury was in contact with Max Reuter who stole the letters from Oswald Dietz, at that time archivist of the Schapper-Willich League.241

"Stieber," says Hirsch, "had learned from the agent of the Prussian Ambassador in Paris Hatzfeldt, the notorious Cherval, of the letters written by the latter to London. Stieber got Reuter to find out where they were, whereupon Fleury stole them on Stieber's orders and with Reuter's aid. These are the stolen letters which Herr Stieber was not ashamed to exhibit 'as such' to the jury in Cologne In autumn 1851 Fleury had been in Paris with Greif and Stieber after the latter had, through the mediation of Count Hatzfeldt, made contact with Cherval, or more correctly, Joseph Cramer with whose assistance he hoped to engineer a plot. With this end in view consultations were held in Paris between Messrs. Stieber, Greif, Fleury, two other police agents, Beckmann* and Sommer, and the famous French spy Lucien de la Hodde (who went by the name of Duprez) and they gave Cherval directions according to which he was to tailor his correspondence. Fleury often laughed in my presence over the scuffle he had provoked between Stieber and Cherval. And the man called Schmidt who in the guise of secretary of a revolutionary league in Strasbourg and Cologne had gained admission to the society founded at the behest of the police by Cherval, was none other than M. de Fleury Fleury was undoubtedly the sole agent of the Prussian secret police in London and all proposals and offers that the Embassy received went through his hands Messrs. Greif and Stieber were accustomed to relying on his judgment."

Fleury informed Hirsch:

"Herr Greif has told you what has to be done At Police Headquarters in Frankfurt they are themselves of the opinion that our primary aim must be to make the position of the political police secure, the means we use to achieve this are immaterial; the September plot in Paris is already one step in this direction."3

Greif returned to London and expressed satisfaction with Hirsch's work but demanded more. In particular he wanted reports on "the secret meetings of the Marx party".

"At all costs," the Police Lieutenant concluded, "we must draw up reports on the League meetings. Do it any way you wish as long as you don't overstep the limits of credibility. I am too occupied to attend to it myself. M. de Fleury will work with you as my representative."

Greifs occupation at that time consisted, as Hirsch states, in a correspondence via de la Hodde-Duprez with Maupas concerning

* The same man b who figures in the Arnim Trial. [Note by Marx in the 1875 edition of the Revelations, to which Appendix 4 to Herr Vogt was supplemented.] He was already then Paris correspondent for the Kölnische Zeitung and was to remain so for many years, [Engels' addition to Marx's note in the 1885 edition of the Revelations.]

[^1]: 1 Reckmann.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 55-56.— F.d.





**[p. 308]**

"Marx had not founded any new central organisation of the League in London Greif agreed with Fleury that in the circumstances we should for the time being prepare reports on meetings of the League ourselves. He, Greif, would vouch for their authenticity, and in any case his submissions would be accepted".

So Hirsch and Fleury set to work."The content" of their reports on the secret meetings of the League I held

"was provided", Hirsch states, "by reports of discussions that took place from time to time; the admission of new members, the founding of new sections in obscure corners of Germany, or a new organisation; speculation to the effect that in Cologne Marx's imprisoned friends did or did not have any prospects of being released; letters that had come from this person or that, and so on. On this last point Fleury usually took care to mention people in Germany who had become suspect as a result of political investigations or who had been involved in some political activity or other. Very often, however, we had to have recourse to our imagination and then we would report on the activities of a non-existent member of the League. But Herr Greif said that the reports were excellent and that anyway we had to have them at all costs. Some of the writing was done by Fleury alone but mostly I had to help him as he was unable to describe the smallest detail without errors of style. In this way the reports came into being and without a moment's hesitation Herr Greif declared his willingness to vouch for their authenticity".

Hirsch then describes how Fleury and he visited Arnold Ruge in Brighton, and Eduard Meyen (of Tobian memory3) and stole letters and lithographed material from them. Not content with this, Greif-Fleury rented a lithographic press from Stanbury Press, Fetter Lane, and together with Hirsch began to produce "radical pamphlets". That "democrat", F. Zabel, could learn a lesson or two here. Let him take note of this:

"The first pamphlet I" (Hirsch) "wrote was entitled An das Landproletariat at Fleury's suggestion; and we managed to make a few good copies of it. Herr Greif sent these copies as documents emanating from the Marx party. To make it seem more plausible we included in the reports of the so-called League meetings, which came into being in the manner described above, a few words about the dispatch of such a pamphlet. One other product of this kind was fabricated; its title was An die Kinder des Volkes and I do not know under whose auspices Herr Greif sent this one in. We later abandoned this trick chiefly because it was so costly."

At this point Cherval arrived in London after his mock escape from Paris and was attached to Greif at a weekly salary of £1 10s.,

"in return for which he was required to make reports on the contacts between the German and French émigrés".

Publicly exposed and expelled from the Workers' Society as a

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 239.— Ed.





**[p. 309]**

Hirsch now returns to the Cologne trial.

"Herr Greif had already been questioned a number of times about the contents of the League reports prepared at his instance by Fleury in so far as they had any bearing on the Cologne trial There were also particular commissions in connection with the trial. On one occasion Marx was alleged to be corresponding with Lassalle via an 'ale-house' and the Public Prosecutor required further information Rather more naïve was the Public Prosecutor's request asking for precise information about the financial assistance that Lassalle in Düsseldorf was allegedly sending to the defendant Röser in Cologne it was believed that the true source of the money was in London."

I have already recounted in Section III, 4 how Fleury, acting on instructions from Hinckeldey, was to find someone in London who would be willing to appear before the jury in Cologne in the guise of H.,a the witness who had disappeared, etc. After a detailed account of this incident Hirsch goes on:

"Herr Stieber had meanwhile urgently requested Greif to supply him, if at all possible, with the original minutes of the League meetings that he had been reporting on. Fleury was of the opinion that he could produce an original minute-book if only the requisite people were available. Above all, however, he would need specimens of the handwriting of some of Marx's friends. I made use of this last remark in order to extricate myself from the whole undertaking; Fleury alluded to the topic only once again and after that he said nothing more. Around this time Stieber suddenly appeared in Cologne with a Minute-Book of the League's central organisation in London I was even more astonished when I found that the minutes as reported in extract in the papers were absolutely identical with the reports concocted by Fleury at Greifs behest. It was evident that Herr Greif or Herr Stieber himself had had a copy made somehow or other, for the minutes in this allegedly original document bore signatures while those submitted by Fleury had none. From Fleury himself I learned about this miracle only that 'Stieber can contrive anything, it will be a sensation!'"

As soon as Fleury heard that "Marx" had had the handwriting of the ostensible signatories of the minutes (Liebknecht, Rings, Ulmer, etc.) witnessed in a London Police Courtb he wrote the following letter:

" To the Royal Police Presidium in Berlin; dated from London. "It is the intention of Marx and his friends here to discredit the signatures on the League Minutes by having handwriting specimens legally authenticated. These specimens are to be produced in the Court of Assizes as the really authentic ones. Everyone familiar with the English laws knows that on this point they can be

[^1]: a Haupt (see this volume, p. 67).— Ed. b Marx uses English: Police Court.— Ed.





**[p. 310]**

With regard to the Minute-Book Hirsch says that

"Herr Stieber declared" (in court) "that he had had the Minute-Book in his hands for two weeks but had scrupled to produce it; he declared further that it had come to him by a courier called Greif Hence Greif had personally delivered his own work. How can this be reconciled with a letter of Herr Goldheim's in which he informed the Embassy that 'the Minute-Book was produced so late only in order to avoid scrutiny as to its authenticity'"

On Friday, October 29, Herr Goldheim arrived in London.

"As Herr Stieber had to face the fact that it was not possible to uphold the authenticity of the Minute-Book he sent a deputy to negotiate with Fleury about it on the spot. At issue was the question whether a proof could not be obtained after all. His discussions were fruitless and he returned without any decision having been reached. Fleury was left in a state of despair for Stieber was now resolved to expose him rather than compromise the police chiefs. But I did not realise that this was the cause of Fleury's disquiet until Herr Stieber made his declaration soon afterwards. In panic, M. Fleury now resorted to his last expedient. He brought me a specimen of handwriting for me to use to copy out a declaration, sign it 'Liebknecht' and take an oath before the Lord Mayor of London that I was Liebknecht Fleury told me that the handwriting was that of the person who had written the Minute-Book and that Herr Goldheim had brought it with him" (from Cologne). "But if Herr Stieber had received the Minute-Book per Greif, the courier from London, how was it possible for Herr Goldheim to bring a specimen of the handwriting of the alleged Minute-Book writer from Cologne at the very moment when Greif had just arrived back in London? What Fleury gave me consisted of a few phrases and a signature" Hirsch 'copied the handwriting as closely as he could and wrote that the undersigned, i.e. Liebknecht, declared that the signature of Liebknecht legally witnessed by Maix and Co. was false and that this, his signature was the only genuine one. When I had finished and had the handwriting in my hands" (i.e. the specimen given him by Fleury to copy), "which fortunately I still possess, I told Fleury, who was not a little taken aback, that I had had second thoughts and would not go through with it. Inconsolable at first, he then announced that he would swear to it himselfFor safety's sake he would have the writing countersigned by the Prussian Consul; and he went to the Consulate at once. I waited for him in a tavern; when he got back he had the countersignature



**[p. 311]**

Fleury's last meetings with Hirsch took place at the end of October 1852. Hirsch's confessions are dated the end of November 1852; and at the end of March 1853 came the "explosion in Berlin" (the Ladendorf conspiracy).*24S

* The reader will be interested to see the testimonials that Stieber himself gave his two accomplices Fleury-Krause and Hirsch. He writes of the first in the Black Book'244

II, p. 69:

"No. 345. Krause, Carl Friedrich August, from Dresden. He is the son of Friedrich August Krause, a farmer executed for his part in the murder of Countess Schönberg in Dresden in 1834, and afterwards" (after his execution?) "a corn-dealer, and of his widow Johanna Rosine née Göllnitz, who is still living. Carl Friedrich was born on January 9, 1824, in the vineyard houses at Coswig near Dresden. From October 1, 1832, he went to the charity school in Dresden; in 1836 he was admitted to the orphanage in Antonstadt, Dresden, and in 1840 he was confirmed. He was then apprenticed to Herr Gruhle, a Dresden merchant, but in the following year he was arrested and detained by the Dresden Municipal Court for repeated theft. However, the period of detention was counted towards his sentence and he was released. After this he lived with his mother without taking a job, but in March 1842 he was arrested again for breaking and entering and this time he was sentenced to four years' imprisonment. On October 23, 1846, he came out of gaol and returned to Dresden and began to associate with the most notorious thieves. Then, the Rehabilitation Society took him up and found him a job in a cigar factory and he remained in this job without interruption or any further misdemeanour until March 1848. But after that date he gave in to his idleness again and began to frequent political societies" (as a government spy; see above his admission to Hirsch in London). "Early in 1849 he became a salesman of the Dresdner Zeitung edited by the republican literateur E. L. Wittig who is now in America but who at that time was in Dresden. In May 1849 he took part in the Dresden uprising and became commandant of the barricade in the Sophienstrasse. He fled to Baden after the uprising was quelled and there he was empowered by the provisional government of Baden (the decrees of June 10 and 23, 1849) to raise a Landsturm and requisition supplies for the insurgents. He was taken prisoner by Prussian soldiers but on October 8, 1849, he escaped from Rastatt." (Just as, later on, Cherval "escaped" from Paris. But now comes the part of the bouquet which has the authentic police- aroma—it should be borne in mind that this was primed two vears alter the Cologne Trial.) "According to a report in the Berlin Publizist, No. 39 of May 15, 1853, taken from a book printed in New York with the tttie Die Opfer der Spionage* by Wilhelm Hirsch, a Hamburg shop-assistant" (() Stieber, you foreboding angel!,J;. "Krause

a Die Opfer der Moucharderie, Rechtfertigungsschrift von Wilhelm Hirsch.—Ed. '' See this volume, p. 71.— Ed.

