---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "5. Slanders "
Page_Range: "337-338"
---

# 5. Slanders 



**[p. 312]**

When the communist trial in Cologne was over, Vogt-like calumnies about my "exploitation" of the workers were busily disseminated, especially in the German-American press. Some of my friends living in America—Messrs. J. Weydemeyer, Dr. A. jacoby (a practising doctor in New York and one of the defendants in the Cologne communist trial) and A. Cluss (an official in the U.S. Navy Yard in Washington) — published a detailed refutation of these absurdities dated New York, November 7, Î853. Their article contained the comment that I was in the right to preserve silence about my private affairs insofar as it was a matter of gaining the approval of the philistines. "But when faced by the hostility of the mob, the philistines and the

turned up in London late in 1850 or early in 1851 as a political émigré bearing the name of Charles de Fleury. At first he lived in somewhat straitened circumstances but later, in 1851, his position improved. For after he was admitted to the Communist League" (another Stieber lie), "he worked as an agent for a number of governments in the course of which, however, he became involved in a number of swindles."

So much for Stieber's gratitude to his friend Fleury who, moreover (as we noted above), was sentenced to several vears' imprisonment in London for forgery just a few months after the Cologne trial.

Concerning the worthy Hirsch we can read (op. cit., p. 58):

"No. 265. Hirsch, Wilhelm, shop-assistant from Hamburg. Tt appears that he went to London not as a refugee but of his own accord." (Why this wholly superfluous lie? After all, Goldheim tried to arrest him in Hamburg!) "But once there he associated with refugees and especially with the communist party. He played a double game. On the one hand, he was active on behalf of the revolutionary party, while, on the other, he offered to spy on political criminals and forgers for a number of continental governments. But he himself became implicated in the worst possible frauds

t-nd swindles. In particular, he was guilty of forgery, so that everyone should be on their guard against him,. Together with various other individuals he even manufactured false paper money merely in order to extract high rewards from the police for uncovering forgeries. He was eventually unmasked by both sides" (namely, both by police forgers and non-police ones?) "and he has now returned from London to Hamburg where he lives in poor circumstances."

Thus far Stieber on his London accomplices to whose "truthfulness and reliability" he is never tired of testifying. It is interesting to see how utterly impossible it is for this model Prussian to speak the simple truth. He cannot even restrain himself from smuggling* quite purposeless lies into the—true and false—facts taken from the documents. On the testimony of such professional liars — and they are more numerous now than ever—hundreds of people are sent to prison and in this lies what is nowadays called salvation of the state. [This note to Appendix 4 was added by Engels in the 3rd (1885) edition of the Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.]

a A pun on the name Stieber and the verb hineinstiebern (to smuggle in, insert).— Ed.

