---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "6. The War between Frogs and Mice "
Page_Range: "338-340"
---

# 6. The War between Frogs and Mice 



**[p. 313]**

6. THE WAR BETWEEN FROGS AND MICEb

In my pamphlet The Knight, etc., from which I quoted above, I wrote on p. 5:

"On July 20, 1851 the 'Agitation Union' was founded, and on July 27, 1851 the German 'Émigré Club'. From that day dates the struggle on both sides of the ocean between the 'Émigrés' and the 'Agitators', the great war between frogs and mice.

Now who will give me words and who the tongue, To sing of such brave deeds in sonorous sounds! For ne'er was strife upon this earth begun More proudly fought on bloodier battle grounds; Compared to this all other wars are roses. To tell of it my lyric art confounds For on this earth there ne'er was seen such glory Or noble valour bright as in this story.

(After Boiardo, Orlando innamorato, Canto 27.)"c

Now it is by no means my intention to go into the details of "the story" of this strife or into the agreement entitled, verbotenus,d

"The Preliminary Agreement about the Treaty on the Alliance" (under which name it was publicised throughout the entire German-American press), which was reached between Gottfried

Kinkel in the name of the Émigré Club, and A. Goegg on behalf of the "Revolutionary League of the Two Worlds", on August 13, 1852. I would only remark that with a few exceptions the entire parliamentary emigration joined in the farce on one side or the other. (Of course, names like K. Vogt were at that time avoided by every party if only for propriety's sake.)

At the end of his revolutionary pleasure and fund-raising tour of the United States, Gottfried Kinkel, the passion flower of German philistinism, wrote a "Denkschrift über das deutsche Nationalanlehn zur Förderung der Revolution", dated Elmira,N. Y., February 22, 1852, in which he gave vent to views which at least

a J. Weydemeyer, A. Cluss, A. Jacoby, "An die Redaktion der New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, November 7, 1853", New-Yorker Criminal Zeitung, No. 37, November 25, 1853.— Ed.

[^1]: b See this volume, p. 87.— Ed. c See present edition, Vol. 12, p. 488.— Ed. d Literally.— Ed.





**[p. 314]**

In a public meeting with Kossuth, who was also engaged at that time on a revolutionary fund-raising campaign in the United States, Gottfried expressed himself in highly aesthetic terms:

"Even from your clean hands, Governor, the gift of freedom would be a bitter pill, and I would moisten it with the tears of my shame."b

Hence Gottfried, having looked the gift-horse so sharply in the mouth, assured the governor that if the latter should present to him "the revolution in the east" with his right hand, he, Gottfried, would present to him "the revolution in the west" in return. Seven years later, in the Hermann, a paper he had founded himself, the very same Gottfried assured his readers that he was a man of rare consistency,c and that having proclaimed the Prince Regentd as Emperor of Germany before the military court in Rastatt,245 he had always kept this as his motto.

Count Oskar Reichenbach, one of the three original regents and the Treasurer of the Revolutionary Loan, published the accounts in London on October 8, 1852, together with a statement in which he dissociated himself from the enterprise. At the same time he declared that "in any event I neither can nor will hand the money over to citizens Kinkel, etc." Instead he invited the shareholders to hand in their provisional loan certificates in exchange for the money in his hands. His own resignation as treasurer, etc., he said,

"was motivated by political and legal considerations The assumptions on which the idea of the loan was based have not been realised. The sum of 20,000

a Marx uses the English phrase: "public opinion".— Ed. b G. Kinkel, "Denkschrift über das deutsche Nationalanlehn zur Förderung der Revolution", New-Yorker Staats-Zeitung, March 2, 1852.— Ed.

c G. Kinkel, "Brief des Herausgebers an einen Freund in Amerika", Hermann, March 26, 1859.— Ed.

[^1]: d William.— Ed.



