---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "7. Palmerston- Polemic "
Page_Range: "340-341"
---

# 7. Palmerston- Polemic 



**[p. 315]**

But Gottfried's faith in revolution could not be shaken so easily and so he procured a "resolution" that allowed him to carry on the business under another name.

Reichenbach's statement of the accounts contains some interest- ing data.

"The Trustees," he says, "cannot be held responsible for contributions which may have been made later by the committees to persons other than myself, and I would ask the committees to take note of this when calling in the certificates and settling accounts."

According to his computations £1,587 6s. 4d. was received, of which London had contributed £2 5s., and "Germany" £9. The expenditure amounted to £584 18s. 5d. and was broken down as follows: Kinkeïs and Hillgärtner's, travel expenses: £220; other travel expenses: £54; lithographic press: £11; cost of provisional certifi- cates: £14; lithographed correspondence, stamps, etc.: £106 Is. 6d. On Kinkel's instructions, etc.: £100.

The Revolutionary Loan ended up with £1,000, which Gottfried Kinkel keeps in the Westminster Bank as earnest money for the first German provisional government. And despite all this, there is still no provisional government. Perhaps Germany believes that 36 actual governments are quite sufficient.

Certain American loan funds which were not incorporated into the central London Treasury were at least employed here and there for patriotic purposes. Such was the case with the £100 which Gottfried Kinkel gave to Karl Blind early in 1858 to transform into "radical pamphlets", etc.

7. PALMERSTON-POLEMIC

"Council Hall, Sheffield, May 6th, 1856

"Doctor,

"The Sheffield Foreign Affairs Committee instruct me to convey to you an expression of their warm thanks for the great public service you have rendered by your admirable exposé of the Kars-Papersa published in the People's Paper.

"I have the honour, &c. "Dr. Karl Marx"b Wm. Cyples, Secretary

[^1]: a Marx's series of articles "The Fall of Kars" (see present edition, Vol. 14).— Ed. b Marx quotes the letter in English.— Ed.



