---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "10. Herr Orges' Letters "
Page_Range: "342-343"
---

# 10. Herr Orges' Letters 



**[p. 317]**

"With my most sincere respects,

A. Scherzer"

9. BLIND'S ARTICLE IN THE FREE PRESS OF MAY 27, 1859a

"The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary "A Correspondent, who encloses his card, writes as follows: — "Sir,—Having been present at the last meeting in the Music Hall, I heard the statement made concerning the Grand Duke Constantine. I am able to give you another fact: —

"So far back as last summer, Prince Jérôme-Napoléon detailed to some of his confidants at Geneva a plan of attack against Austria, and prospective rearrange- ment of the map of Europe. I know the name of a Swiss senator to whom he broached the subject. Prince Jérôme, at that time, declared that, according to the plan made, Grand Duke Constantine was to become King of Hungary.

"I know further of attempts made, in the beginning of the present year, to win over to the Russo-Napoleonic scheme some of the exiled German Democrats, as well as some influential Liberals in Germany. Large pecuniary advantages were held out to them as a bribe. I am glad to say that these offers were rejected with indignation." b

10. HERR ORGES' LETTERS

"Dear Sir,

"I heard today from Herr Liebknecht that you would be kind enough to put a legal document at our disposal, relating to the origins of the pamphlet against Vogt.c May I ask you urgently to send it to us as quickly as possible, so that we can produce it in court. Please, send the document against a receipt and charge us for any expenses you may have incurred. Incidentally, my dear Sir, the liberal party sometimes misjudges the Allgemeine Zeitung. We (the editors) have gone through fire and water and have passed all the tests of political commitment. If you do not consider the separate piece of work, the individual article, but our whole activity you will probably come to realise that no German newspaper strives as we do, without haste, but without rest, for unity and freedom, power and culture, for spiritual and material progress, for greater patriotic awareness and higher moral standards of the German nation, and that no paper achieves more than ours. You should judge our deeds by their effects. Asking you once more most urgendy to grant my request, and assuring you of my greatest respect,

"Yours sincerely,

Hermann Orges "Augsburg, 16/10"

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 122-24.— Ed. b Marx quotes this report in English.— Ed. c See this volume, pp. 119-24.— Ed.



