---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "11. Circular against K. Blind "
Page_Range: "343-344"
---

# 11. Circular against K. Blind 



**[p. 318]**

11. CIRCULAR AGAINST K. BLIND

I include here only the concluding section of my circular against Blind of February 4, 1860, which was written in English3:

"Now, before taking any further step, I want to show up the fellows who evidently have played into the hands of Vogt. I, therefore, publicly declare that the statement of Blind, Wiehe and Hollinger, according to which the anonymous pamphlet was not printed in Hollinger's office, 3, Litchfield Street, Soho, is a deliberate lie. First, Mr. Vögele, one of the compositors, formerly employed by Hollinger, will declare upon oath that the said pamphlet was printed in Hollinger's office, was written in the hand-writing of Mr. Blind, and partly composed by Hollinger himself. Secondly, it can be judicially proved that the pamphlet and the article in Das Volk have been taken off the same types. Thirdly, it will be shown that Wiehe was not employed by Hollinger for eleven consecutive months, and, especially, was not employed by him at the time of the pamphlet's publication. Lastly, witnesses may be summoned in whose presence Wiehe himself confessed having been persuaded by Hollinger to sign the wilfully false declaration in the Augsburg Gazette.h Consequently, I again declare the above said Charles Blind to be a deliberate liar.

Karl Marx"

From the London "Times", February 3rd.

"Vienna, January 30th.— The Swiss Professor Vogt pretends to know that France will procure for Switzerland Faucigny, Chablais, and the Genevese,«-' the neutral provinces of Savoy, if the Grand Council of the Republic will let her have the free use of the Simplon."d

a Marx quotes this excerpt from the circular in English (see this volume, pp. 10-11).— Ed.

b The Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung.— Ed. c Genevois.— Ed. d Marx quotes this report in English (see also this volume, p. 195).— Ed.

