---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "14. From the Trial Papers "
Page_Range: "345-349"
---

# 14. From the Trial Papers 



**[p. 320]**

"Declared and signed by the said Johann Friedrich Wiehe at the Police Court, Bow Street, this 8th day of February, 1860, before me Th. Henry, Magistrate of the said court.

"L.S. Johann Friedrich Wiehe"*

14. FROM THE TRIAL PAPERS

" Gouvernement Provisoire

République Française. Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité.

Au nom du Peuple Français

"Paris, 1 Mars 1848

"Brave et loyal Marx,

"Le sol de la république française est un champ d'asile pour tous les amis de la liberté. La tyrannie vous a banni, la France libre vous rouvre ses portes, à vous et à tous ceux qui combattent pour la cause sainte, la cause fraternelle de tous les peuples. Tout agent du gouvernement français doit interpréter sa mission dans ce sens. Salut et fraternité.

"Bruxelles, le 19 Mai 1848

"Mon cher Monsieur Marx, "J'entends avec un grand plaisir par notre ami Weerth que vous allez faire paraître à Cologne une Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane dont il m'a remis le prospectus. Il

"Paris, March 1, 1848

"Honest, worthy Marx,

"The soil of the French Republic is a place of asylum for all the friends of freedom. Tyranny has expelled you, a free France opens its doors to you once more, to you and to all those who fight for the sacred cause, the fraternal cause of all the peoples. Every official of the French Government should interpret his task in this sense. With fraternal greetings.

Ferdinand Flocon, Member of the Provisional Government."—Ed.

[^1]: Ferdinand Flocon, Membre du gouvernement provisoire"b

[^2]: a Marx gives this document in English (see also this volume, pp. 129-30).— Ed. b "Provisional Government French Republic. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. In the name of the French People





**[p. 321]**

a "My dear Mr. Marx, I hear with great pleasure from our friend Weerth that you intend to publish a Neue Rheinische Zeitung in Cologne of which he has sent me the prospectus. It is extremely necessary for this paper to keep us in Belgium informed about the affairs of German democracy, since it is not possible to learn anything definite about this from the Kölnische Zeitung, the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung and the other aristocratic German papers which we receive here in Brussels, any more than from our Indépendance Belge, all of whose special reports are written from the standpoint of the interests of our bourgeois aristocracy. Herr Weerth has told me that he is going to join you in Cologne to collaborate on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and he has promised me in your name to send me copies of it in exchange for the Débat social which I shall forward to you. I can ask nothing better than to correspond with you about the affairs common to our two nations. It is in the interest of both our countries that Belgians and Germans should become better acquainted with each other, for in France events are about to take place which in a short time will pose problems affecting both our countries. I have just come back

[^1]: L. Jottrand, Avt." a





**[p. 322]**

"Mon cher Marx, "N'ayant pas de vos nouvelles, depuis très longtemps, j'ai reçu votre dernière3

avec la plus vive satisfaction. Vous vous plaignez du retard des choses, et du peu d'empressement de ma part de vous répondre à la question que vous m'aviez faite. Que faire: l'âge ralentit la plume; j'espère cependant que vous trouverez mes avis et mon sentiment toujours les mêmes. Je vois que votre ..dernière est tracée à la dictée par la main de votre secrétaire intime, de votre adorable moitié: or Madame Marx ne cesse de se rappeler du vieux hermite de Bruxelles. Qu'elle daigne recevoir avec bonté mes salutations respectueuses.

"Conservez-moi, cher confrère, dans vos amitiés. Salut et fraternité.

Lelewel" b

from Paris after spending ten days there during which time I did my best to gain an understanding of what is happening in this great metropolis. At the end of my stay I found myself in the midst of the events of May 15. I was even present at the session of the National Assembly during which the people rushed into the Chamber As far as I have understood both from seeing the attitude of the people of Paris and from listening to the speeches of the leading statesmen in the French Republic at the present time, a powerful reaction is expected against the events of February last on the part of the bourgeoisie; the events of May 15 will doubtless hasten this reaction. And this will undoubtedly lead in a short time to a new uprising by the people France will soon have to have recourse to war. It is for this reason that we ought to consider here and in your country what common action we should take in that event. If to start with the war is directed against Italy we shall have a breathing space; but if it is directed against this country from the very beginning I do not yet know what we should do, and we should then be in need of the advice of the Germans In the meantime I shall announce the approaching publication of your new paper in the Sunday edition of the Débat social I plan to go to London towards the end of June. Should you have occasion to write to any of your friends in London, I would be grateful if you could ask them to receive me kindly.

"With cordial greetings,

L. Jottrand, Lawyer" See also this volume, pp. 263-66.— Ed.

a This refers to Marx's letter to Lelewel of February 3, 1860 (present edition, Vol. 41).— Ed.

b "My dear Marx, not having heard any news from you for a long time, I was very glad to receive your last communication. You complain about the delay and the lack of urgency on my part in answering the question you put to me. But what can one do: age slows down the pen. Nevertheless, I hope that you will find my opinions and my feelings the same as ever. I see that your last letter was written at your dictation by the hand of your private secretary, your charming wife. So Madame Marx still remembers the old hermit in Brussels. Please, convey to her my respectful greetings.

"Continue to include me, dear colleague, among your friends. With fraternal greetings.

Lelewel".—-Ed.



**[p. 323]**

"My dear Marx,

"I have read a series of infamous articles against you in the National-Zeitung and am utterly astonished at the falsehood and malignity of the writer. I really feel it a duty that every one who is acquainted with you, should, however unnecessary such a testimony must be, pay a tribute to the worth, honour and disinterestedness of your character. It becomes doubly incumbent in me to do so, when I recollect how many articles you contributed to my little magazine, the Notes to the People, and subsequently to the People's Paper, for a series of years, utterly gratuitously; articles which were of such high value to the people's cause, and of such great benefit to the paper. Permit me to hope that you will severely punish your dastardly and unmanly libeller.

"Believe me, my dear Marx, most sincerely, yours,

Ernest Jones "Dr. Karl Marx" 3

"Tribune Office, New York, March 8th, 1860

"My dear Sir,

"In reply to your request I am very happy to state the facts of your connection with various publications in the United States concerning which I have had a personal knowledge. Nearly nine years ago I engaged you to write for the New York Tribune, and the engagement has been continued ever since. You have written for us constantly, without a single week's interruption, that I can remember; and you are not only one of the most highly valued, but one of the best paid contributors attached to the journal. The only fault I have had to find with you has been that you have occasionally exhibited too German a tone of feeling for an American newspaper. This has been the case with reference both to Russia and France. In questions relating to both, Czarism and Bonapartism, I have sometimes thought that you manifested too much interest and too great anxiety for the unity and independence of Germany. This was more striking perhaps in connection with the late Italian war than on any other occasion. In that I agreed perfectly with you: sympathy with the Italian people. I had as little confidence as you in the sincerity of the French Emperor, and believed as little as you that Italian liberty was to be expected from him; but I did not think that Germany had any such ground for alarm as you, in common with other patriotic Germans, thought she had.

"I must add that in all your writings which have passed through my hands, you have always manifested the most cordial interest in the welfare and progress of the labouring classes; and that you have written much with direct reference to that end.

"I have also at various times within the past five or six years been the medium through which contributions of yours have been furnished to Putnam's Monthly,247 a literary magazine of high character; and also to the New American Cyclopaedia, of which I am also an editor, and for which you have furnished some very important articles.

[^1]: a Marx gives the letter in English.— Ed.



