---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "15. Dentu Pamphlets "
Page_Range: "349-352"
---

# 15. Dentu Pamphlets 



**[p. 324]**

Charles A. Dana, Managing Editor of the N. Y. Tribune

"Dr. Charles Marx" 3

15. DENTU PAMPHLETS

I have shown that the Dentu pamphlets are the source from which the German Dâ-Dâ derives his wisdom about world history in general and "Napoleon's salutary policy" in particular. The "salutary policy of Napoleon" is a phrase from a recent leading article by "democrat" F. Zabel. What the French themselves think and know about these pamphlets can be seen from the following extract from the Paris weekly, the Courrier du Dimanche, No. 42, of October 14, 1860.

"Pour ce qui regarde le moment actuel, prenez dix brochures au hasard, et vous reconnaîtrez que neuf au moins ont été pensées, élaborées, écrites par qui? par des romanciers de profession, par des chansonniers, par des vaudevillistes, par des sacristains!

"Parle-t-on dans les gazettes de mystérieuses entrevues entre les puissances du Nord, de la Sainte-Alliance qui ressuscite? Vite voilà un faiseur agréable de couplets assez littéraires, et même (jadis) passablement libéraux, qui court chez l'inévitable M. Dentu et lui apporte sous ce titre ronflant: La coalition, une longue et fade paraphrase des articles de M. Grandguillot. L'alliance anglaise semble déplaire parfois à M. Limayrac? Vite, un M. Châtelet, chevalier de l'ordre de Grégoire le Grand,248 et qui doit être sacristain quelque part, si j'en crois son style, publie ou republie un long et ridicule factum: Crimes et délits de l'Angleterre contre la France. Déjà l'auteur du Compère Guillery (Edmond About) avait jugé à propos de nous édifier sur les arcanes politiques de la monarchie prussienne, et avait donné du haut de ses chutes théâtrales, des conseils de prudence aux chambres de Berlin. On annonce que M. Clairville va prochainement élucider la question de l'isthme de Panama, si fort embrouillée par M. Belly; et sans doute quelques jours après la conférence royale du 21 Octobre,249 on verra paraître à toutes les vitrines de nos libraires une splendide brochure rose qui portera ce titre: Mémoire sur l'entrevue de Varsovie par le corps de ballet de l'Opéra.

"Cette invasion, en apparence inexplicable, des questions politiques par les dii minores de la littérature, se rattache à bien des causes. Nous en citerons ici une seule, mais qui est la plus immédiate et la plus incontestable.

"Dans le marasme presque universel d'esprit et de coeur, ces messieurs, qui font le triste métier d'amuseurs publics, ne savent plus par quel moyen secouer et réveiller leurs lecteurs. Les vieilles gaîtés de leurs refrains et de leurs anecdotes leur reviennent sans cesse. Eux-mêmes se sentent aussi mornes, aussi tristes, aussi ennuyés que ceux qu'ils entreprennent de dérider. Voilà pourquoi à bout de ressources, ils se sont mis, en désespoir de cause, à écrire les uns des mémoires de courtisanes, les autres des brochures diplomatiques.

"Puis, un beau matin, un aventurier de la plume, qui n'a jamais fait à la politique le sacrifice d'une heure sérieuse d'étude, qui n'a pas même au coeur le

[^1]: a Marx gives the letter in English.— Ed.





**[p. 325]**

"Est-il nécessaire de dire, après cela, ce que valent les brochures qui nous inondent? Ramassez un jour tout ce que vous avez de courage, tâchez de les lire jusqu'au bout et vous serez effrayés de l'ignorance inouïe, de la légèreté intolérable, voire même de l'amoindrissement de •.ens moral qu'elles décèlent dans leurs auteurs. Et je ne parle pas ici des plus mauvaises Et chaque année nous courbe plus bas, chaque année voit apparaître un nouveau signe de décadence intellectuelle, chaque année ajoute une honte littéraire nouvelle à celles dont il nous faut déjà rougir. De telle sorte que les plus optimistes se prennent quelquefois à douter de demain, et se demandent avec angoisse: Sortirons-nous de là?" a

1 "As to the present state of affairs, pick any ten pamphlets at random and you will find that at least nine of them have been devised worked out and written by whom? By professional novelists, song-writers, vauceville-vvriters or sextons.

"If the newspapers mention mysterious meetings between the northern powers or a project to resurrect the Hoiv Alliance, Immediately some amiable person manufacturing fairly literary songs, and even (formerly) passably liberal songs, will run off to the inevitable M. Dentu and supply him, under the resounding title: "La Coalition', with a lengthy and insipid paraphrase of the articles of M. Grandguil- !ot. If the alliance with England seems sometimes to disolease M. Limayrac, a M. Châtelet, knight of the Order of Gregory the Great, and a man who must be a sexton somewhere or other, to judge him by his stvle, quickly publishes or republishes a long, ridiculous account: Crimes et délits de l'Angleterre contre la France.

The author of Compère Guillery (Edmona About) has already deemed it expedient to edifv us with stories about the political secrets of the Prussian monarchv and

"«m i,ie heights ot his theatrical fiascos he has nonoured the Chambers of Berlin

i; is ->ru(.< nt ..u\ice. Tt has been announced that M. Clairviile will soon . r1 in o iio Heni •>{ the Isthmus of Panama which has been so thoroughly •' . < !!' and no doubt a :ew days after the royai conference oi' -\* (' " i .ail see in the windows oi ail our bookshops a spienaid pink • armg the title: Mémoire sur l'entrevue de Varsovie par ie corps de ballet de

r ' it.i L^ inexplicable invasion of the political arena by the lesser gods of • 01 dime ' «»•> aianv causes. We shall only mention one here, but that one is the most palpable and the most indisputable of all.



**[p. 326]**

"Paris, November 8 Louis-Napoleon spends his gold in vain in supporting such newspapers as the National-Zeitung." (Manchester Guardian of November 12, I860.)3

"Amidst the almost universal decline of intellect and heart, the gentlemen who have the dreary task of amusing the public are at a loss for the means to astonish and rouse their readers. They continually reproduce the old jokes of their refrains and their anecdotes. They are themselves as depressed, as melancholy and as bored as those whom they undertake to cheer up. This is why out of sheer despair, when they have come to their wits' end, some of them begin to write the memoirs of courtesans, and others diplomatic pamphlets.

"Then, one fine morning, an adventurer of the pen who has never sacrificed a single hour of serious study to politics, who does not even have the ghost of a genuine conviction of any sort in his heart, gets out of bed and says to himself: '1 must strike a great blow! Let's see. what shall I do to attract the notice of the general public which instinctively ignores me? Shall I write an article on the Leotard affair or on the Eastern Question? Shall I reveal to an astonished world the secrets of boudoirs which I have never entered, or the mysteries of Russian politics of which I know even less? Shall I melt with emotion in the Voltairean manner about the faie of fallen women, or bewail in Biblical prose the wretched Maronite population persecuted, plundered and slaughtered by Moslem fanaticism? Shall I sing the praises of Mademoiselle Rigolboche or pen an apologia of temporal power? I have it: I shall settle for politics. I shall entertain my public better with kings and emperors than with loose women.' Having said which, our supernumer- ary of the literary Bohème wades through the Moniteur, hangs around the colonnades of the Stock Exchange for several days, visits a few officials and in the end he knows which way the wind of the town's curiosity is blowing, or the direction of the favour of the Court. He then selects a title capable of capturing a sufficient portion of this wind, whereupon he rests on his laurels. He has now done everything necessary: for these days only two things are needed to make a pamphlet: the title and the relations thai may be supposed to exist between the author and people in high places'.

"Is it stili necessarv. after all this, to speak of the value of the pamphlets which are flooding the market? If one day you pluck up all your courage and try to read them right through to the end you will be appalled by the extraordinary ignorance. the unbearable frivoiousness and especially the utter debasement of moral principles tiiai thev reveal in their authors. And I am not speaking of the worst of them And even year sees the standard sink still lower, every year brings new evidence oi intellectual decadence, every year brings a new literary dishonour to add to those which already make us blush. Things have come to such a pass tha even the greates. optimists sometimes wonder what the morrow will bring and anxiously ask themselves: Shall we ever be able to escape from all this?"—Ed.

a Marx quotes the passage from The Manchester Guardian in English and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed.

