---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. English Politics "
Page_Range: "360-366"
---

# K. Marx. English Politics 



**[p. 335]**

Karl Marx

ENGLISH POLITICS

London, Jan. 27, 1860

The most interesting topics touched upon in the parliamentary address3 debates were the third Chinese war, the commercial treaty with France, and the Italian complication.262 The Chinese question, it ought to be understood, involves not only an international question, but also a constitutional question of vital import. The second Chinese war,263 undertaken on the arbitrary behest of Lord Palmerston, having led first to a vote of censure against his Cabinet, and then to a forcible dissolution of the House of Commons—the new House, although elected under his own auspices, was never called upon to cashier the sentence passed by its predecessor. To this very moment Lord Palmerston's second Chinese war stands condemned by a parliamentary verdict. But this is not all.

On the 16th of September, 1859, the account of the repulse on the Peiho was received in England. Instead of summoning Parliament, Lord Palmerston addressed himself to Louis Bonaparte, and conversed with the autocrat on a new Anglo- French expedition against China.

"During three months," as Lord Grey says, "the British ports and arsenals resounded with the din of preparation, and measures were taken for dispatching artillery, stores, and gun-boats to China, and for sending land forces of not less than 10,000 men, in addition to the naval forces."b

a Victoria, "The Queen's Speech. The Address, January 24, 1860," The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.—Ed.

b Here and below Marx quotes Lord Grey's speech in the House of Lords on January 24, 1860 during the parliamentary address debates. See The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed.



**[p. 336]**

In the debate on the address in the House of Commons in 1857, Mr. Gladstone, the present Chancellor of the Exchequer, with reference to the Persian war,264 had indignantly exclaimed:

"I will say, without fear of contradiction, that the practice of commencing wars, without first referring to Parliament, is utterly at variance with the established practice of the country, dangerous to the Constitution, and absolutely requiring the intervention of this House, in order to render the repetition of so dangerous a proceeding utterly impossible."3

Lord Palmerston has not only repeated the proceeding, "so dangerous to the Constitution"; he has not only repeated it this time with the concurrence of the sanctimonious Mr. Gladstone, but as if to try the strength of ministerial irresponsibility, wielding the rights of Parliament against the Crown, the prerogatives of the Crown against Parliament and the privileges of both against the people—he had the boldness to repeat the dangerous proceeding within the same sphere of action. His one Chinese war being censured by the Parliament, he undertakes another Chinese war in spite of Parliament. Still, in both Houses, only one man mustered courage enough to make a stand against this ministerial usurpa- tion; and, curiously to say, that one man belonging not to the popular, but to the aristocratic branch of the Legislature. The man is Lord Grey. He proposed an amendment to the address in answer to the Queen's speech to the purport that the expedition ought not to have been entered upon before the sense of both Houses of Parliament was taken.

The manner in which Lord Grey's amendment was met, both by the spokesman of the ministerial party and the leader of her Majesty's opposition, is highly characteristic of the political crisis which the representative institutions of England are rapidly approaching. Lord Grey conceded that, in a formal sense, the Crown enjoyed the prerogative of entering upon wars, but since Ministers were interdicted from spending one single farthing on

[^1]: a Marx quotes Gladstone from Lord Grey's speech.— Ed.





**[p. 337]**

Now which sort of reply did Lord Grey elicit on the part of the Cabinet? The Duke of Newcastle, who had been foremost in protesting against the lawfulness of Palmerston's second Chinese war, answered in the first instance that "the very wholesome practice had arisen of late years of never moving an amendment to the address, unless some great party object was to be attained."0

Consequently, Lord Grey being not prompted by factious motives, and pretending not to aspire to put Ministers out in order to put himself in, what, for the life of the Duke of Newcastle, could he mean by infringing upon that "very wholesome practice of late years"? Was he crotchety enough to fancy that they were to break

a George III, "Message respecting Vessels captured by Spain at Nootka Sound. 1790, 5 May", The Parliamentary History of England from the Earliest Period to the Year 1803, London, 1816, Vol. 28, pp. 764-66.— Ed.

b Maria II da Gloria.— Ed. c George IV [Message respecting Portugal, December 11, 1826], Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, London, 1826, Vol. 16, pp. 334-36.— Ed.

d Here and below Marx quotes the Duke of Newcastle's speech in the House of Lords on January 24, 1860. See The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed.

Equally original was the manner in which the Duke of Newcastle endeavored to prove the legality of the Peiho expedition. There exists an Anglo-Chinese treaty of 1843, by dint of which England enjoys all the rights conceded by the Celestials to the most favored nations.266 Now Russia, in her recent treaty with China, has stipulated for the right of sailing up the Peiho.267 Consequently, under the treaty of 1843, the English had a right to such passage. This, the Duke of Newcastle said, he might insist upon "without any great special pleading." Might he, indeed! On the one side there is the ugly circumstance that the Russian treaty was only ratified, and, consequently, dates its actual existence only from an epoch posterior to the Peiho catastrophe. This, of course, is but a slight husteron proteron.3 On the other hand, it is generally known that a state of war suspends all existing treaties. If the English were at war with the Chinese at the time of the Peiho expedition, they, of course, could appeal neither to the treaty of 1843, nor to any other treaty whatever. If they were not at war, Palmerston's Cabinet has taken upon itself to commence a new war without the sanction of Parliament? To escape the latter part of the dilemma, poor Newcastle asserts that since the Canton bombard- ment,268 for the last two years, "England had never been at peace

a The latter (put as) the former—a figure of speech in which what should come last is put first; inversion of the natural order.— Ed.



**[p. 339]**

a Lord Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on January 25, 1860, The Times, No. 23526, January 26, I860.— Ed.

b Hsien Fêng.— Ed. c The Earl of Granville's speech in the House of Lords on January 24, 1860, The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed.

[^1]: d The reference is to Napoleon III and Napoleon I.— Ed.





**[p. 340]**

Consequently, the amendment was not pressed to a division, and the whole debate, in both Houses, on the Chinese war, evaporated in grotesque compliments showered by both factions on the head of Admiral Hope for having so gloriously buried the English forces in the mud.

Written on January 27, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5868, February 14, 1860

a Lord Derby's speech in the House of Lords on January 24, 1860, The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed.

