---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The New Treaty between France and England "
Page_Range: "366-370"
---

# K. Marx. The New Treaty between France and England 



**[p. 341]**

Karl Marx

THE NEW TREATY BETWEEN FRANCE AND ENGLAND

London, Jan. 28, 1860

The commercial treaty with France270 will not be communicated to the House of Commons before the 6th of February. Still, with what was broached during the address debates—with what is insinuated by the French papers, and with what is gossiped at London and Paris, one may, Mr. Gladstone's solemn warnings3

notwithstanding, already venture upon some general appreciation of this "sweet changeling."271 It was on Monday, the 23d of January, that the treaty was duly signed at Paris, Rouher, Minister of Commerce, and Baroche, ad interim Minister of Foreign Affairs, acting as its French godfathers, while, on the part of England, the same function was performed by Lord Cowley and Mr. Cobden. That Mr. Michel Chevalier—the ex-St. Simonian— had his hand in the pie, and that general regret is felt throughout the whole realm of France that Louis Napoleon had not the tact of allowing this distinguished personage (viz.: Mr. Chevalier) to inscribe his name to the treaty by the side of his "English confrère,"h is a piece of news which that "distinguished personage" himself was so condescending as to send over to London and have inserted in the various free-trade organs. But, what is not known by the journals, is that Père Enfantin, the ex-high-priest of St. Simonism, was the principal actor on the French side. Is it not truly wonderful how those St. Simonians, from Père Enfantin down to Isaac Péreire and Michel Chevalier, have been turned into the main economical pillars of the second Empire. But to return to

a Gladstone's speech in the House of Commons on January 25, 1860, The Times, No. 23526, January 26, I860.— Ed.

[^1]: b Colleague.— Ed.





**[p. 342]**

From the following tables3 the number of protective duties levied during the year 1858 by England on French articles may be inferred:

Articles. Duty. Baskets £2,061 Butter 7,159 China and Porcelain Ware 1,671 Clocks 3,928

a "Commercial Treaties and Free Trade", The Economist, No. 857, January 28, 1860, p. 85.— Ed.

July 1, 1860 — Suppression of the import duties on cotton and wool. July 1, 1860 — Belgian tariff applied to English coal and coke. October 1, 1860 — Duty of 7 francs the 100 kilogs. substituted for the present duties on iron.

December 31, 1860 — Diminution of the duties on the importation of machinery.

a "Foreign correspondence. Paris, Thursday", The Economist, No. 857, January 28, I860.—Ed.



**[p. 344]**

October 1, 1861—Removal of all other prohibitions, to be replaced by protective duties ad valorem for five years, and not exceeding 25 per cent afterward.

Save the reduction of the duty on English coal to the same rate now paid by Belgian coal, all the concessions apparently made by France appear of a very equivocal character. The price of a tun of pig iron No. 1 (Wales) amounts, for instance, at present, to £3 10/, but the French duty on iron will amount to nearly another £3. That the 30 per cent ad valorem duty on prohibited articles will be virtually protective is conceded by the London Economist. So far as the reductions, real or apparent, on English articles are put off to future periods, the English Government acts, in fact, the part of an insurance office for Louis Napoleon's tenure of power for the terms specified. The true secret, however, of the commercial treaty, viz.: that "it is no commercial treaty at all," but a simple hoax, intended to puzzle John Bull's commercial mind, and to cloak a deep-laid political scheme, has been masterly exposed by Mr. Disraeli during the address debates.3 The substance of his revelation was this:

"Some years ago, the Emperor of the French made a communication similar to the letter lately addressed by him to the Minister of the Interior,0 in which communication he proposed the entire extinction of the prohibitive system, and the adoption of measures similar to those contained in his late manifesto.0 In 1856, a bill in this sense was introduced into the Corps Législatif [], but, before being passed, was laid before the 86 Provincial Councils of France,d which, with the exception of 6, all adopted the proposal with an understanding that a certain period of time should elapse before the new system should be brought into play. Consequently, the Emperor agreeing with this proposition, some public document expressed his resolution to carry this system into effect, and appointed July, 1861, as the period with which it should commence." All, therefore, that France engages by the treaty to do in July, 1861, "was already provided by the course of law in France."

Written on January 28, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5868, February 14, 1860

a Benjamin Disraeli's speech in the House of Commons on January 24, 1860, The Times, No. 23525, January 25, I860.— Ed.

b The Times has "the Minister of State".— Ed. c See this volume, p. 330.— Ed. d The Times has "86 Councils General, the departmental Parliaments of France".— Ed.

