---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Interesting from Prussia "
Page_Range: "422-428"
---

# K. Marx. Interesting from Prussia 



**[p. 397]**

Karl Marx

INTERESTING FROM PRUSSIA

Berlin, June 13, 1860

This evening the Prince Regent3 will leave for Baden-Baden, where a sort of conference between Louis Napoleon and a council of crowned German heads is to take place on the 16th and 17th inst.306 The Prince Regent's suite will be formed by Gen. von Manteuffel, the chief of the Military Cabinet; Gen. von Alvensle- ben, Lieut.-Col. von Schimmelmann, von Loë, chef d'escadron, Count von Pückler, the Court Marshal, Privy Councilor von Illaire, Mr. Borkmann, the Regent's Secretary, and Prince von Hohenzol- lern-Sigmaringen, the chief of the Cabinet and a member of the Royal family. You will remember that on the occasion of the pri- vate letter addressed by the Prince Regent to the Prince Consort of England, intercepted at London and thence communicated to Louis Bonaparte,*3 the latter insisted upon a personal interview with the Prince Regent as the best means of clearing away the misunderstanding that seemed to have sprung up between France and Prussia. Shortly afterward, on the Prince Regent's visit to Saarbrücken and Trier, towns situated on the confines of France, Louis Napoleon again intimated his wish to improve this opportunity for meeting the Prince. This proposal was, however, declined. Meanwhile, the rumor having got abroad of the Prince Regent's intention to stay for a month at Baden-Baden, Max, the King of Bavaria,0 took it into his head to propose to the Regent a sort of conference at the watering-place with the Princes of Southern Germany, who wanted to come to a friendly understand-

[^1]: a William, Prince of Prussia.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 382.— Ed. c Maximilian II.— Ed.





**[p. 398]**

officially notified Herr von Schleinitz, the Prussian Foreign Minister, that his august master, in order to dispel the distrust, whose innocent object France appeared to be, thought a friendly interview at Baden-Baden, with the actual chief of the Prussian State, a great benefit to both Germany and France. On the Prussian Minister's reply that unjust suspicions, not likely to be dispelled by such an interview, hovered also over Prussia, and that besides a confidential conference of German Princes at Baden- Baden had already been convened, the French Embassador, on further information from Paris, rejoined that Louis Napoleon would delight in finding together the greatest possible number of German Princes, and that, moreover, he had some important communication to personally impart, which would allow of no further delay. At this point the Hohenzollern power of resistance gave way.c A Vienna dispatch conveyed at once to Berlin the expression of Austria's displeasure at the intended rendezvous, but the other German Courts were more or less soothed by a circular note of the Prussian Foreign Minister.d Consequent upon this circular note, the King of Hanovere unexpectedly arrived at Berlin this morning, and declared spontaneously his willingness of accompanying to Baden-Baden the Prince Regent, who then, by a telegraphic dispatch, summoned also the King of Saxonyf to the conference. It need hardly be said, that the Dukes of Coburg- Gotha and Nassau8 will follow in the track.

Thus, a meeting of German Princes, originally purporting to mean a demonstration against France, has turned into a sort of levee, held by Louis Bonaparte, on German soil, and crowded by the Kings, Grand Dukes, and other little potentates of the German Confederation. On the part of the Prince Regent it looks like

3 Friedrich I Wilhelm Ludwig, William I and Ludwig III.— Ed. b La Tour d'Auvergne-Lauraguais.— Ed. c For the preparation for a friendly interview at Baden-Baden see "Prusse", Le Nord, June 15, I860.— Ed.

d Alexander Schleinitz, "Preussische Circulardepesche, 6. Juni, 1860", Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 261, September 17, I860.— Ed.

e Ernest Augustus.— Ed. f Johann Nepomuk Maria Joseph.— Ed. s Ernst II and Adolf.— Ed.



**[p. 399]**

As to the "important communication" which the Dutch savior of society is about to impart to the crowned heads of Germany, there is every reason to believe that, imitating Metternich's operations on the successive Congresses of Vienna, Aix-la-Chapelle,c Troppau,

[^1]: a Colleague.— Ed. b "Your brother and servant."—Ed. c Aachen.— Ed.





**[p. 400]**

While the Prince Regent and his German dii minorum gentium*3

are thus to be convinced of the necessity to gather round the general savior of society, the Prussian people is to be belabored in the opposite sense by M. About's new pamphlet, "The Emperor Napoleon III and Prussia."0 Although this pamphlet has as yet been retained, some stray copies of it have already found their way to Berlin, and by another letter I have sent you the most remarkable passages from this newest Tuileries manifesto.d The Prussian people must choose, says the oracle from the Seine, between the feudalism of Austria and the democratic principle of the French Empire. It is only by the latter that, resolving of course to give its mighty neighbor some material guaranties, the German people can hope to realize the unity so much coveted by it. Having traced the shortcomings of the present Prussian Government in a very superficial manner, the author of the pamphlet sets out on informing the Prussians of the true nature of the "democratic principle" so characteristic of the second French Empire, and which consists, to say it shortly, in the election of its chief by what is called in modern Gaul, "general suffrage." It is true, and M About does hardly dare deny it, that every sort of liberty has been sequestrated in France to the profit of the Dutch adventurer, but then, this sequestration was based on general suffrage. It is in this way, with the aid of France, and on the same democratic basis, that a Teutonic Empire under the auspices of a Hohenzollern ought to be reared in Germany. The operation is a very simple one. Prussia has only to cede part of her "legitimate" possessions

[^1]: a Karl Vogt.— Ed. b Literally, "lesser gods"; here, minor princes.— Ed. c The reference is to Edmond About's La Prusse en I860, Paris, 1860.— Ed. d See this volume, pp. 391-96.— Ed.





**[p. 401]**

In another letter I propose surveying the state of the Schleswig-Holstein complications, which impart to the Baden- Baden Conference its actual importance. For the present, I shall only mention that on the 10th of June an interview took place at the castle of Kronburg between the King of Sweden and the King of Denmark.0 A fortnight before this rendezvous the Swedish Foreign Ministerc had sent to the Danish Foreign Ministerd a note to the purport that it was very desirable that the King of Denmark's suite should contain no persons the encounter with whom might prove embarrassing for his Swedish Majesty. In other words, the King of Denmark was called upon to clear his company

a Marx refers to Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Contrat social ou principes du droit politique, London, 1782, v. 5, p. 254.— Ed.

[^1]: b Charles XV and Frederick VIL— Ed. c Kristoffer Rutger Ludvig Mandeström.— Ed. d Carl Christian Hall.— Ed.





**[p. 402]**

Written on June 13, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5986, June 30, 1860

[^1]: a Formerly.— Ed.



