---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "1 "
Page_Range: "435-441"
---

# 1 



**[p. 410]**

Karl Marx

THE STATE OF BRITISH MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY

I

[New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6016, August 6, 1860]

London, July 10, 1860

The reports of the Inspectors of Factories,3 which have just been issued, comprise three reports only; the district lately vacated by Mr. Leonard Horner having been annexed partly to Sir John Kincaid's district (Scotland), and partly to Mr. Redgrave's district, now comprising 3,075 factories and printworks; while Mr. Robert Baker's district (Ireland, and some parts of England) remains within its old boundaries. The following is a general abstract, showing the total number of accidents reported to the three Inspectors during the six months ended the 30th April, 1860:

Ad'ts. Y'g per. Child. Total.

Nature of Injury M. F. M. F. M. F. M. F. Total. Causing death 14 3 7 2 2 2 23 7 30 Amputat'n of right hand or arm 5 6 3 I 1 9 7 16 Amputat'n of left hand or arm 4 1 7 3 1 _ 12 4 16 Amputat'n of part of right hand 23 24 29 22 15 7 67 53 120 Amputat'n of part of left hand 16 17 21 18 8 7 45 42 87

a In writing this article Marx made use of the Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, for the Half Year ending 30th April 1860, London, I860.— Ed.

[^1]: ACCIDENTS ARISING FROM MACHINERY. b

[^2]: b ibid., p. 4.— Ed.





**[p. 6]**

of leg or foot — — — — Fract. of limbs and

bones of trunk 30 11 43 11 11 4 Fracture of hand or

foot 39 43 30 37 20 15 Injuries to head and face 20 17 23 29 11 4 Lac'tns, contus'ns, and other injur's not enum. above 268 255 315 352 128 66

—

84 26 110

89 95 184

54 40 94

711 673 1,384

Total 424 377 479 465 197 105 1,100 947 2,047

ACCIDENTS NOT ARISING FROM MACHINERY.

Total 83 30 59 26 21 10 163 66 229

The reports are unanimous in bearing witness to the extraordi- nary activity of trade during the half year. Such was the demand for work that in some branches of industry the supply of labor was insufficient. This difficulty was less prevalent in the woolen manufactures, where improved machinery allowed the manufac- turers to dispense with manual labor, than in cotton and worsted factories, where much machinery has been standing for want of hands, particularly of the younger. Some vicious methods have been adopted in past times to meet this transitory deficiency of labor. In the infancy of the factory system, when manufacturers were in want of labor, it was obtained directly by application to the overseers of some distant parish, who forwarded a certain number of apprentices, children of tender age, who were bound to the manufacturers for a term of years. The children being once apprenticed, the Poor-Law officers congratulated their respective parishes on their deliverance from idle mouths, while the manufacturer proceeded t© make the best of his bargain by keeping them at the most economical rate, and by screwing from them all the labor of which they were capable. Hence the first of the series of Factory acts passed in 1802, 42 Geo. Ill, Cap. 73, has for its title, "An Act for the Preservation of the Health and Morals of Apprentices and Others Employed in Cotton and Other Mills, and Cotton and Other Factories," and was merely intended to mitigate the evils of the apprenticeship system. But as improve- ments were made in machinery, a different kind of labor was



**[p. 412]**

A comparison of the rate of wages paid to factory operatives in 1839 and that paid in 1859 proves the highly interesting fact that the rate of wages has risen, at least nominally, in factories where the hours of work were restricted to 60 per week, while, with a few exceptions, a real reduction has been suffered in the printing, bleaching, and dyeing works in which the labor of children, young

a These facts and the following are taken from the "Report of A. Redgrave, Esq., Inspector of Factories, for the Half Year ending the 30th April 1860", Reports of the Inspectors of Factories, pp. 26-27.— Ed.



**[p. 40]**

WEEKLY WAGES."

1839. 1859.

Hours of work per week 69 60 Occupations. Steam-engine tender 24sh. 30sh. Warehouse boys 7 8 Warehouse men 18 22 Carding department—Scutchers (young women and

girls) 7 8 Skippers (young men) , 11 14 Overlookers 25 28 Card minders (boys from 14 to 18) 6 7 Drawing-frame tenders (young women) 6 6d 8 Spinning department—Spinners on self-acting mules 16 to 18 20 to 22 Piecers (women and young men) 8 10 Overlookers 20 20 Doubling department—Doublers (women) 7 9 Doffers (girls) 4 5 Overlookers 24 28 Jobbers (young men) 10 13

In the reeling, gassing, and power-loom departments, there has also been a slight increase of wages. The anticipations of those who warned the factory operatives that they would seriously suffer by the diminution of their hours of work, have thus been completely disappointed. Compare, on the other hand, the movement of wages in those branches where the hours of daily labor are legally unrestricted:

Weekly Wages. 1839. 1859.

Color-mixer Machine-printer Foreman

[^1]: CALICO-PRINTING, DYEING, BLEACHING, SIXTY HOURS PER WEEK.b

[^2]: a op. cit., p. 31.— Ed. b op. cit., p. 32.— Ed.





**[p. 16]**

Block-cutter Block-printer Dyer Washer and laborer 16 and 15 16 and 15

FUSTIAN-DYEING, SIXTY-ONE HOURS PER WEEK.

Dressers 18 22 Bleachers 21 18 Dyers 21 16 Finishers 21 22

By far the most interesting portion of the Reports of Mr. Alexander Redgrave and Sir John Kincaid relates to the develop- ment and extension of cooperative societies for the erection and working of mills in Lancashire, and also to some degree in Yorkshire. These cooperative societies, which have multiplied since the passing of the Limited Liability Act, are generally composed of operatives. Each society has a capital of £10,000 and upward, divided into shares of £5 and £10, with power to borrow in certain proportions to the capital subscribed, the money borrowed being made up of small loans by operatives and persons of the like class. In Bury, for instance, upward of £300,000 will be required to put the cooperative mills there built and building into working order. In cotton-spinning mills the spinners and persons employed are frequently shareholders in the same mill, working for wages and receiving interest upon their shares. In cotton-weaving sheds, the partners frequently hire and work looms. This is attractive to operatives, because no great capital is required to start them in their undertaking. They purchase the yarn ready for the loom, weave the cloth, and the factory operation is completed; or else they receive the yarn from some manufacturer who trades with them, and return to him the woven fabric. But this cooperative system is not confined to the spinning and weaving of cotton. It has extended to the trade on a variety of articles of consumption, such as flour, groceries, draperies, etc.

The following report, drawn up by Mr. Patrick, one of Sir John Kincaid's sub-inspectors, contains some valuable information in regard to the progress of this new system of mill-ownership, which, I am afraid, will be put to a severe test by the next industrial crisis.

"There has been another in existence in the neighborhood of Bacup about six years, trading under the firm of the 'Rossendale Industrial Association.'

"They built a factory; but, I am told, were not thriving, in consequence of the want of sufficient funds. This, also, was on the cooperative system. The firm has now been changed to 'The Rossendale Industrial Company,' and are incorporated under the Limited Liabilities Act, with power to raise a capital of £200,000. £40,000 has been taken in shares of £10 each, and they have borrowed about £4,000. This £4,000 has been borrowed from small capitalists, in sums from £150 down to £10, without any mortgages being given. When this cooperative company first started, every shareholder was an operative. In addition to the Wear Mill, that referred to as having been built by the Rossendale Industrial Association, they have now bought of Messrs. R. Mum Bros., Irwell Mills, in Bacup, and are working the two.

"The prosperity and success of the New Bacup and Wardle Commercial Company seem to have given rise to the new companies that are now formed in my immediate vicinity, and preparing large factories to carry on their business. One is the 'New-Church Cotton Spinning and Weaving Company,' under the Limited Liabilities Act, with power to raise £100,000 in £10 shares, £40,000 of which is already paid, and the Company has borrowed £5,000 on mortgage at five per cent. This Company has already started, having taken an unoccupied factory of 40- horse power, Vale Mill, New-Church, and they are building the 'Victoria Works,' which will require an engine of 100-horse power. They calculate upon employing 450 people when complete, which they think will be in February next.

"Another is 'The Ravenstall Cotton Manufacturing Company,' also limited, with a nominal capital of £50,000, in £5 shares, with power to borrow to the extent of £10,000. About £20,000 is already paid up, and they are erecting at Hareholme a factory requiring an engine of 70-horse power. I am told that in both of these companies nine-tenths of the shareholders are of the operative class.

"There is another cooperative company which has sprung up within the last six months. 'The Old Clough Cotton Company,' which purchased from Messrs. R. & J. Mum, two old mills, called Irwell Springs, and are on the same principle as the

