---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Interesting from Sicily. - Garibaldi's Quarrel with La Farina. - A Letter from Garibaldi "
Page_Range: "446-450"
---

# K. Marx. Interesting from Sicily. - Garibaldi's Quarrel with La Farina. - A Letter from Garibaldi 



**[p. 421]**

Karl Marx

INTERESTING FROM SICILY.— GARIBALDI'S QUARREL WITH LA FARINA.—

A LETTER FROM GARIBALDI

London, July 23, 1860

According to a telegram received to-day from Palermo, Col. Medici's impending attack on Milazzo had decided the King of Naples3 to give orders for the complete evacuation of Sicily by the Neapolitan army, and their withdrawal to his continental domin- ions. Although this telegram stands in need of confirmation, it seems beyond dispute that Garibaldi's cause is working on, despite the disease his troops suffer from, and the diplomatic intrigues his Government is pestered with.

Garibaldi's open breach with the Cavour party, viz.: the expulsion from Sicily of La Farina, the notorious marplot, and of Signors Griscelli and Totti,b Corsicans by birth, and Bonapartist police agents by profession, has given rise to very contradictory comments on the part of the European press. A private letter of Garibaldi's to a London friend,312 which has been communicated to me with the permission to state its principal contents in the Tribune, will leave no doubt as to the real bearing of the case. Garibaldi's letter is of a date anterior to his decree of the 7th inst., by which the three aforesaid plotters were summarily removed from the island, but it fully explains the points at issue between the General and the Minister—between the popular Dictator and the dynastic Grand Vizier; in one word, between Garibaldi and Cavour. The latter, in secret understanding with Louis Bonaparte, whom Garibaldi stigmatizes as "cet homme faux" (that false man), and with whom he foresees "the necessity of measuring his sword some fine morning" — Cavour, then, had determined upon

a Francis II.— Ed. b "Affaires des deux Siciles", Le Constitutionnel, No. 198, July 16, 1860.— Ed.



**[p. 422]**

La Farina is a native of Sicily, where, in 1848, he distinguished himself among the Revolutionists by his hatred against the

[^1]: a Napoleon III.— Ed.





**[p. 423]**

Crispi, with the undermining of whose Ministry La Farina opened his intrigues, had for a long time been an exile in London, where he was counted among Mazzini's friends, and made the deliverance of Sicily the all-absorbing subject of his exertions. In the Spring of 1859 he went under a Wallachian name and character to Sicily at great personal risk, visited every great town

a Giuseppe La Farina, Storia dltalia dal 1815 al 1850, Vols. I-VI, Torino, 1851-1852.—Ed.

[^1]: 15-1305





**[p. 424]**

Written on July 23, 1860 Reproduced from the newspaper

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6018, August 8, 1860

