---
Volume: 17
Document_Title: "K. Marx. The Crops in Europe "
Page_Range: "486-490"
---

# K. Marx. The Crops in Europe 



**[p. 461]**

Karl Marx

THE CROPS IN EUROPE

London, August 21, 1860

The more the season advances the gloomier become the harvest prospects and the fainter grow the hopes still founded on a possible return of fine weather. The character of the past Summer was altogether exceptional, not only throughout the United Kingdom, but over the whole of Northern Europe, Northern France, Belgium, and the Rhenish Provinces included. In regard to this country the season has been justly described in these words:

"After the cold, backward Spring, June proved so extremely wet that in many districts turnips could not be sown, mangel-wurzel hoed, nor any of the usual operations of the period performed. Then, after about ten days of fine weather, the season became so unsettled that two days together without rain have been rather a surprise. But, in addition to the excess of moisture, the present, we may say the past Summer, has been remarkable for the absence of sunshine and the very low temperature which have prevailed even when there has been no rain."3

The average fall of rain for the year being about 20 inches, and the fall of rain during the months of May and June having reached the figure of 11.17, it appears that these two months have given over half a year's supply of water. During the last week, at the commencement of which a favorable change seemed impend- ing, the weather proved more unsettled and boisterous than ever, real deluges of rain being, on the 16th and 18th inst., accom- panied by thunder-storms and the tempests of the south-west wind. Consequently the wheat prices at Mark Lane337 advanced yesterday about two shillings the quarter over the rates of last Monday's15 market.

a "The Wet Summer", The Economist, No. 886, August 18, 1860, p. 899.— Ed. b August 13; see The Times, Nos. 23698 and 23704, August 14 and August 21, I860.—Ed.



**[p. 462]**

"There can be little doubt," says The Gardeners' Chronicle of Saturday last, "that the wheat crop generally is considerably injured. Of 140 reports received from as many correspondents in England and Scotland, no fewer than 91 declare the crop to be below the average, and if the chief wheat-growing districts be selected, it will be found that the proportion of unfavorable returns is quite as large. Thus, five out of six reports from Lincolnshire, three out of five from Norfolk and Suffolk, and all from the counties of Oxford, Gloucestershire, Wilts, Hants, and Kent, are unfavorable."

A great deal of the wheat crop has rotted at the root before the grain was mature, and in many districts it has been blighted and mildewed. While wheat is thus attacked by the disease, and in many districts to a large extent, the potato disease, which commenced in 1845, continued with great virulence for the four subsequent years, and gradually abated since 1850, has reappeared in an aggravated form, not only in Ireland, but in many districts of England and the Northern Continent.

The Freeman's Journal thus resumes the general harvest pros- pects of Ireland:

"The oat crop is generally looked upon as all but lost. Except in a few inconsiderable districts, it has not yet ripened; but remains perfectly green, and beaten to the ground by the violence of the weather. Wheat promises to share in the calamity which generally threatens the grain crops. Little of it has been yet cut, and this crop, the condition of which inspired the most sanguine expectations only a few weeks since, is now causing farmers the deepest concern. [] With regard to the potato crop, the general opinion is, that if the present weather continues for another month, it must be inevitably lost."3

According to the Wexford Independent,

"the potato disease is progressing, and in some places fully one-third of the produce is found affected, irrespective alike of size and description, and in proportion to the time of planting."

This much appears, therefore, certain: The general harvest will be much belated beyond its usual term, and the existing stores

a Quotations from The Freeman's Journal were given in the article "The Harvest" in The Times, No. 23703, August 20, I860.— Ed.

This excess of imports over exports must necessarily aggravate the drain of bullion and the consequent unsettled state of the money market which characterizes all periods of failing harvests, and extraordinary purchases of foreign corn. If, in England, the effect of the imminent monetary pressure is not likely to stretch far beyond the sphere of political economy, it is quite another thing on the Continent, where serious political disturbances are almost unavoidable whenever a monetary crisis coincides with a failing harvest and a great increase of taxation. Already the most serious apprehensions are entertained at Paris, where the magis- trate is just busied with buying up whole lots of old houses, in

a The figures quoted here and at the end of the paragraph were given in The Economist, No. 886, August 18, 1860, p. 895.— Ed.

[^1]: b See this volume, pp. 406-08.— Ed.





**[p. 464]**

Written on August 21, 1860

First published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6043, September 6, 1860; reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune, No. 1595, September 7 and in the New-York Weekly Tribune, No. 991, September 8, 1860 without the last paragraph

Reproduced from the New-York Daily Tribune

[^1]: a "Workmen".— Ed. b "My dear Persigny." — Ed.



