---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "1. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 1 January "
Page_Range: "36-37"
---

# 1. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 1 January 



**[p. 1852]**

l

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER'

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 1 January 1852

Dear Weiwi,

A happy New Year to you, and greetings to your wifea from myself and wife.

I have not been able to send you the article until now,2 having been interrupted not only by events coming one on top of another but to an even greater extent by private affairs. Henceforward, I shall be regularity itself.

If, which I hope will not happen, your undertakingd has to be postponed for any length of time on financial grounds, let Dana have the article so that he may translate it into English for his paper.4 However, I hope this will not be necessary.

As for the Revues,e since they are not ready to hand but have to be obtained at some expense and trouble from Hamburg, please let me know roughly how many sales you think I can count on in America.6

I shall be sending you from here Notes to the People by our friend Ernest Jones, the most important leader of the English party; you should find them a veritable mine when it comes to filling the gaps in your paper.

[^1]: Lupusb has fallen seriously ill and hence has not yet been able to send anything. Red Wolff'sc article seemed to me unusable, hence I did not send it off.3

[^2]: Give Dana my regards. Tell him I have received his newspapers and his letter and shall be sending him a new WORK next week.5

[^3]: a Louise - b Wilhelm Wolff - c Ferdinand Wolff - d the publication of Die Revolu- tion - e Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue.



