---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "2. Engels to Marx. 6 January "
Page_Range: "37-38"
---

# 2. Engels to Marx. 6 January 



**[p. 4]**

Greeting and fraternity.

Your

K. Marx

Yesterday I hammered away at Freiligrath for all I was worth and he promised me to concoct a poem for you on the most recent occurrences.3

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , . . . . . r „ „ Moscow 1934 Published in English m full for the first time

2

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 6 January 1852

Dear Marx,

BY THIS TIME, you will, I trust, have completely recovered from your afflictions; I also hope that your wife will no longer be angry with me about the coup d'état which plunged you for two days into such depths of melancholy.7 At any rate, please give her and your children my kindest regards.

I shall get an article done for Weydemeyer in time for next Friday's steamer and hope you will let me have something topical for the Tribune, which I shall at once translate. It's really not a paper that calls for any serious exertion. Barnum stalks its columns large as life, and the English is ghastly—but this apart, it has some good qualities which, however, have nothing at all to do with our UNE. If you can see that it reaches me by Thursday— even by the 2nd post—you shall have the translation back in London in time for Saturday's steamer, i.e. by the 2nd post arriving there on Friday. Then, next week, I shall set to work on the articles on Germany and shall soon be done with them.b

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 8. - b This presumably refers to Article VII of Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany.



