---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "3. Engels to Jenny Marx. 14 January "
Page_Range: "38-40"
---

# 3. Engels to Jenny Marx. 14 January 



**[p. 5]**

In 1851 the English cotton industry consumed 32,000 bales a week as against 29,000 bales in 1850.a The entire surplus, and a good deal more, went to the East Indies and China; at present Manchester is almost wholly dependent on deliveries to these two markets and to the HOME TRADE, since very little is going to the Continent. This cannot last much longer. They are sailing very near the wind here, and the fact that, e.g., cotton prices are soaring, despite an exceptionally heavy crop, merely in the expectation of even heavier demand, is of itself significant enough.

Weerth dropped me a few lines today from Bradford inquiring about the insufferable Lüders who has written to him. If you can tell me whether and to what extent this old jackass has been involved in the intrigues there, I should be grateful and it might come in handy. Otherwise, nothing else to report, BUSINESS WITH US SLACK, fog and smoke in abundance.

Your

F. E.

3

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX

Manchester, 14 January 1852

Dear Mrs Marx,

I would have answered your kind letterb long ago had I not been totally prevented from doing so by a whole mass of things—in particular the presence of my brother-in-lawc whom I

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, igi3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a 'State of Trade. Manchester, Jan. 3', The Times, No. 21003, 5 January 1852. - b See this volume, pp. 567-69. - c Emil Blank





**[p. 6]**

I trust that in the meantime the paterfamilias3 will have arisen from his bed of pain and penance, and only hope that the Library will not entirely drive the Tribune from his mind. The information about the honourable Lüders was conveyed forthwith to Weerth, likewise as much as was necessary concerning the worthy Kinkel.

The lambastings received by the great Willich are most pleasing so far as we are concerned, while for him there would appear to be an excellent prospect of repeated applications. Once the spell of inviolability and invincibility cast around himself by the great war- rior has been broken by a bonne volée,c not one blackguard of an émigré, right down to the last Conrad,9 will rest until he has repeat- ed the experiment and wreaked upon the noble fellow tangible vengeance for his private GRIEVANCES. The great man's courage malheureuxd may then console itself with the thought that those who did the thrashing were all of them 'men of principle'. Thrashings he may have had, but they were 'principled thrashings'.

comes out, there'll be a fine how-d'ye-do! The philistines will no longer dare to write letters for fear of their falling into our hands. How scurrilously hypocritical it was on Kinkel's part to maintain that he had written to London, telling them to get in touch with us! This fact only goes to show that he has been constantly and most disagreeably 'challenged' on our account in America and that, among the democratic rabble there, we too have a SET of adherents who swear by us, as do the others by Kinkel or Heinzen or Hecker, heaven knows why; these must be adherents à la Magnus Gross, Wilhelmi, etc., people who would only have to spend a short time in our company to be better informed both about us and themselves, and to return to the common fold where they belong.

[^1]: I return Cluss' letter herewith." As an agent, the fellow's beyond compare. When the business of Willich's mystification10

[^2]: a Karl Marx - b of the British Museum - c sound thrashing - d discomfited cour- age - e See this volume, pp. 568-69.



