---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "4. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 16 January "
Page_Range: "40-42"
---

# 4. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 16 January 



**[p. 7]**

Warm regards to Marx and the little ones from your

F. Engels

4

London, 16 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Today I got up for the first time in a fortnight. From this you will see that my indisposition—not yet wholly overcome—was a

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd.l, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER12

[^3]: IN NEW YORK

[^4]: a Matthew 24:6. - b willy-nilly





**[p. 8]**

esprit très fin et très railleur6 and whose passion is 'authentic', yet does not render him either 'uncritical' or 'superstitious'. He is a true revolutionary and a man of honour to the marrow, a compliment I would pay to only a very few. Nevertheless a poet, whatever he may be as an homme,c needs applause and ADMIRATION. This is, I believe, peculiar to the genre as such. I am only telling you all this to remind you not to lose sight, when corresponding with Freiligrath, of the distinction between the 'poet' and the 'critic'. It is, by the by, very nice of him to address his poetical letter directly to you. I think that this will be helpful to you in New York.

I do not know whether I shall manage to send you another article today. Pieper had promised me to write an article for you. Up till this moment he has not yet turned up and when he does, the article will have, to be put to the test—i.e. whether it is consigned to the flames, or is considered worthy of crossing the ocean. I am trop faible encore1 to go on writing. More today week. Regards from my family to yours.

Lupus is still not fully recovered and hence has not yet sent anything.

Your

K. Marx

of our League 15 which you should insert in your paper in small print among the advertisements or below the line.

[^1]: Apropos. Enclosed is yet another 'statement' from a member 14

[^2]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, III. - b more or less courtesans - c they have to be cajoled to get them to sing - d a wit very subtle and very mocking - e man - f still too weak



