---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "7. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 23 January "
Page_Range: "46-48"
---

# 7. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 23 January 



**[p. 13]**

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 ü m e

7

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 23 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Unfortunately my indisposition has up till now prevented me from writing to you this week, i.e. for your paper.3 With much effort I concocted an article for Dana,b who had received nothing from me for six weeks or more. For years, nothing has so pulled me down as this damned haemorrhoidal complaint, not even the last French fiasco.0 Enfin,6 I shall be all the better for having been forcibly kept away from the librarye for 4 weeks, hard though this was.

You will be getting two more articles about the 18th Brumaire/ of which the first will be dispatched, come what may, on Friday next and the other immediately afterwards, if not at the same time.

As for Lupus, I have been chivvying him a great deal and he seems to have made up his mind to take a retrospective look at Kossuth's Hungarian carrière9 for your paper. You have made two mistakes, first in failing to name Lupus along with ourselves in your announcement,28 and secondly in not approaching him direct Make good the second with a letter which you may enclose in one

[^1]: Enclosed Pieper's article.22

[^2]: a Die Revolution - b F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution, VII. - c An allu- sion to Louis Bonaparte's coup d'état of 2 December 1851. - d Well - e of the British Museum - f K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, III and IV. - 8 career





**[p. 14]**

Because I live some distance from Freiligrath and because I received Pieper's article only just before the post left, we have today been compelled to send you two letters instead of one.' This will be avoided next time.

Enclosed another statement from my friend Pfänder (Bauer no longer belongs to our League). You will have to publish it, since the Windmill Streeters' statement against him appeared in both the American and the European papers.24 It would be a good idea if, beneath this statement, you were to print the comment that it contains only what could be published under present police conditions (the accounts between Bauer and Pfänder on the one hand and the former League on the other, further, the control exercised by the Central Authority over the administration of those monies, we being in the majority on the C.A.—none of these things can, of course, be published yet); that, counting on the political precautions we, for our part, have to take in Germany, Arnold Winkelried Ruge,b that old gossip and 'Confusius'0 of European democracy, made an allusion to those matters (i.e. those of Pfänder and Bauer) about which he himself knew only from hearsay at 3rd or 4th hand, in the hope of incriminating myself and Engels in the eyes of the public, although the business was no concern of ours,d in just the same way as the jackass suggested that it was the Windmill Streeters who threw us out when it was we who had broken with that society,' as Pfänder's letter also implies.

You might also announce that a new workers' society has been formed in London under Stechan's chairmanship,25 which will keep aloof from 'Emigration', 'Agitation'26 and Great Windmill Street alike, and pursue a serious line.

Tu comprends, mon cher,1 that this society belongs to us, although we only send our younger people there; I refer to our 'heducatedg

people' not to our workers. They all go there.

[^1]: a See next letter. - b Arnold Ruge is ironically compared with Arnold Winkel- ried—a semi-legendary hero of the Swiss war of liberation against the Austrian yoke in the fourteenth century. - c A play on the resemblance between Confusius (confusion) and Confucius, the name of the Chinese philosopher. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement' (present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 535-36). - e See K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement on Resignation from the German Workers' Educational Society in London' (present edition, Vol. 10). - f You will understand, my dear fellow - 8 Marx uses Berlin dialect: jebildeten.



