---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "9. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. Between 23 January and "
Page_Range: "35-52"
---

# 9. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. Between 23 January and 





**[p. 1852]**

l

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER'

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 1 January 1852

Dear Weiwi,

A happy New Year to you, and greetings to your wifea from myself and wife.

I have not been able to send you the article until now,2 having been interrupted not only by events coming one on top of another but to an even greater extent by private affairs. Henceforward, I shall be regularity itself.

If, which I hope will not happen, your undertakingd has to be postponed for any length of time on financial grounds, let Dana have the article so that he may translate it into English for his paper.4 However, I hope this will not be necessary.

As for the Revues,e since they are not ready to hand but have to be obtained at some expense and trouble from Hamburg, please let me know roughly how many sales you think I can count on in America.6

I shall be sending you from here Notes to the People by our friend Ernest Jones, the most important leader of the English party; you should find them a veritable mine when it comes to filling the gaps in your paper.

[^1]: Lupusb has fallen seriously ill and hence has not yet been able to send anything. Red Wolff'sc article seemed to me unusable, hence I did not send it off.3

[^2]: Give Dana my regards. Tell him I have received his newspapers and his letter and shall be sending him a new WORK next week.5

[^3]: a Louise - b Wilhelm Wolff - c Ferdinand Wolff - d the publication of Die Revolu- tion - e Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue.





**[p. 4]**

Greeting and fraternity.

Your

K. Marx

Yesterday I hammered away at Freiligrath for all I was worth and he promised me to concoct a poem for you on the most recent occurrences.3

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , . . . . . r „ „ Moscow 1934 Published in English m full for the first time

2

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 6 January 1852

Dear Marx,

BY THIS TIME, you will, I trust, have completely recovered from your afflictions; I also hope that your wife will no longer be angry with me about the coup d'état which plunged you for two days into such depths of melancholy.7 At any rate, please give her and your children my kindest regards.

I shall get an article done for Weydemeyer in time for next Friday's steamer and hope you will let me have something topical for the Tribune, which I shall at once translate. It's really not a paper that calls for any serious exertion. Barnum stalks its columns large as life, and the English is ghastly—but this apart, it has some good qualities which, however, have nothing at all to do with our UNE. If you can see that it reaches me by Thursday— even by the 2nd post—you shall have the translation back in London in time for Saturday's steamer, i.e. by the 2nd post arriving there on Friday. Then, next week, I shall set to work on the articles on Germany and shall soon be done with them.b

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 8. - b This presumably refers to Article VII of Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany.





**[p. 5]**

In 1851 the English cotton industry consumed 32,000 bales a week as against 29,000 bales in 1850.a The entire surplus, and a good deal more, went to the East Indies and China; at present Manchester is almost wholly dependent on deliveries to these two markets and to the HOME TRADE, since very little is going to the Continent. This cannot last much longer. They are sailing very near the wind here, and the fact that, e.g., cotton prices are soaring, despite an exceptionally heavy crop, merely in the expectation of even heavier demand, is of itself significant enough.

Weerth dropped me a few lines today from Bradford inquiring about the insufferable Lüders who has written to him. If you can tell me whether and to what extent this old jackass has been involved in the intrigues there, I should be grateful and it might come in handy. Otherwise, nothing else to report, BUSINESS WITH US SLACK, fog and smoke in abundance.

Your

F. E.

3

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX

Manchester, 14 January 1852

Dear Mrs Marx,

I would have answered your kind letterb long ago had I not been totally prevented from doing so by a whole mass of things—in particular the presence of my brother-in-lawc whom I

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, igi3 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a 'State of Trade. Manchester, Jan. 3', The Times, No. 21003, 5 January 1852. - b See this volume, pp. 567-69. - c Emil Blank





**[p. 6]**

I trust that in the meantime the paterfamilias3 will have arisen from his bed of pain and penance, and only hope that the Library will not entirely drive the Tribune from his mind. The information about the honourable Lüders was conveyed forthwith to Weerth, likewise as much as was necessary concerning the worthy Kinkel.

The lambastings received by the great Willich are most pleasing so far as we are concerned, while for him there would appear to be an excellent prospect of repeated applications. Once the spell of inviolability and invincibility cast around himself by the great war- rior has been broken by a bonne volée,c not one blackguard of an émigré, right down to the last Conrad,9 will rest until he has repeat- ed the experiment and wreaked upon the noble fellow tangible vengeance for his private GRIEVANCES. The great man's courage malheureuxd may then console itself with the thought that those who did the thrashing were all of them 'men of principle'. Thrashings he may have had, but they were 'principled thrashings'.

comes out, there'll be a fine how-d'ye-do! The philistines will no longer dare to write letters for fear of their falling into our hands. How scurrilously hypocritical it was on Kinkel's part to maintain that he had written to London, telling them to get in touch with us! This fact only goes to show that he has been constantly and most disagreeably 'challenged' on our account in America and that, among the democratic rabble there, we too have a SET of adherents who swear by us, as do the others by Kinkel or Heinzen or Hecker, heaven knows why; these must be adherents à la Magnus Gross, Wilhelmi, etc., people who would only have to spend a short time in our company to be better informed both about us and themselves, and to return to the common fold where they belong.

[^1]: I return Cluss' letter herewith." As an agent, the fellow's beyond compare. When the business of Willich's mystification10

[^2]: a Karl Marx - b of the British Museum - c sound thrashing - d discomfited cour- age - e See this volume, pp. 568-69.





**[p. 7]**

Warm regards to Marx and the little ones from your

F. Engels

4

London, 16 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Today I got up for the first time in a fortnight. From this you will see that my indisposition—not yet wholly overcome—was a

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd.l, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER12

[^3]: IN NEW YORK

[^4]: a Matthew 24:6. - b willy-nilly





**[p. 8]**

esprit très fin et très railleur6 and whose passion is 'authentic', yet does not render him either 'uncritical' or 'superstitious'. He is a true revolutionary and a man of honour to the marrow, a compliment I would pay to only a very few. Nevertheless a poet, whatever he may be as an homme,c needs applause and ADMIRATION. This is, I believe, peculiar to the genre as such. I am only telling you all this to remind you not to lose sight, when corresponding with Freiligrath, of the distinction between the 'poet' and the 'critic'. It is, by the by, very nice of him to address his poetical letter directly to you. I think that this will be helpful to you in New York.

I do not know whether I shall manage to send you another article today. Pieper had promised me to write an article for you. Up till this moment he has not yet turned up and when he does, the article will have, to be put to the test—i.e. whether it is consigned to the flames, or is considered worthy of crossing the ocean. I am trop faible encore1 to go on writing. More today week. Regards from my family to yours.

Lupus is still not fully recovered and hence has not yet sent anything.

Your

K. Marx

of our League 15 which you should insert in your paper in small print among the advertisements or below the line.

[^1]: Apropos. Enclosed is yet another 'statement' from a member 14

[^2]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, III. - b more or less courtesans - c they have to be cajoled to get them to sing - d a wit very subtle and very mocking - e man - f still too weak





**[p. 9]**

First published much abridged in Die

Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, No. 29, Stuttgart, 1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

5

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 20 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Only since yesterday have I been up and about again and it was not until today that I again took up my pen.

Since I was unable to go out and visit Chapman as I had planned, Pieper, with the enthusiasm he habitually displays in the first ten minutes, offered to discount the bill for me. The other evening he brought me the money, only to declare that he would send you the bill so that you could have it discounted in Manchester. I, as well as my wife, told him that we knew you couldn't do so. But he had already written his letter and, since he made it pretty clear that I appeared, for reasons of my own, to be putting obstacles in his way, I gave him his head and be damned to it, feeling sure that you would return the stuff to him. Now, when he informs me of this fait? it turns out that he was not in such a hurry after all, but was merely seeking to give himself airs. For me, it was a nasty business, since you might have thought I had been guilty of an indiscretion.

In France les choses vont à merveille.b And I hope la belle France will not pass through this school too casually but will have to spend a longer time in class. War, whether it comes a few MONTHS

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: a fact - b things are going splendidly





**[p. 10]**

As you know, our people in Cologne have not been brought before the Assizes under the pretext that the case is so difficult that the investigation must be begun all over again.

Madier has just been here. He proved to me de la manière la plus crapauded that the FRENCHMEN are capable of taking London by breakfast time and assaulting all of England's coasts within five hours. One has too much pitie^ for the poor devils not to hold one's tongue quand ils déraisonnent.1

Write soon.

Your

K. M. How is le commerce?

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t , m e

6

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 22 January 1852

Dear Marx,

Herewith the 7th article for the Tribune. The eighth, etc., will be done tomorrow evening, and today I shall get something ready for Weydemeyer. In his case, I am for a start restricting myself to England,1 being unable to bring myself to read German newspapers and do something on Germany. Could you not perhaps persuade Lupus, who, I hope, is fit as a fiddle again, to send off something 'From the German Empire'18?—Weerth will produce something for Weydemeyer next week; this week he cannot. I hope to see him here the day after tomorrow and he

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a We have had the Napoleon of peace (Louis Philippe's nickname) - b Louis Bonaparte - c What then? - d in the most philistine manner - e pity - f when they talk nonsense





**[p. 11]**

The Pacific having arrived from New York yesterday, there's a chance that tomorrow might bring the numbers3 promised me by Weydemeyer—but I am not counting on this since he may have waited for the regular English MAIL STEAMER. By the way, he should not send so many, 50 copies is too much and will probably cost a mint of money, and who are they all to be sent to? I will find out what the charges are and if needs be—that is, if he can't arrange the business more cheaply through parcels consignment agen- cies—10 copies would be quite sufficient; for he cannot after all count on subscribers in Europe. A few in London, perhaps; otherwise maybe only in Hamburg. And that would also call for an agency, which would not pay for itself.

I trust you'll soon be sending me an article to translate for the Tribune.

Jones has written to me asking for contributions. I shall do my best and have given him my word.19 All this means that any spare time I might have for swotting is frittered away piecemeal, and that's bad. I must see how I can arrange things and diddle the office. Jones mentions a dirty trick Harney played on him20 and says he was cheated out of £15, concerning which you would be able to tell me more—what is all this? He was, of course, VERY BUSY and his letter consists largely of unfinished sentences and exclamation marks.

As to Pieper's DODGE in the matter of the bill, the whole stratagem was, of course, perfectly plain to me, and Monsieur le bel

hommeh will have realised that he needs rather more cunning to conjure eight pounds out of my pocket. Being well aware how he stood financially on 2 January, I chaffed him about his supposed shortage of money, warned him against dishonest and unsound bill-brokers in London, declared that the bill must be dispatched as quickly as possible, and finally advised him to have it cashed through Weydemeyer—in which case, it would again pass through your hands and, upon the arrival of the notification of payment, which would, of course, come to you or me, it would quite spontaneously give rise to a further discounting transaction with this youthful trading house. I owe him 2 pounds, for which he also asked; this I also promised to repay, but not before the beginning of February.

That the good Louis Napoleon must go to war is clear as day and, if he can come to an understanding with Russia, he will

[^1]: a of Die Revolution - b Mr Handsome





**[p. 12]**

Otherwise, so far as I can see, there are only 2 prospects open to Louis Napoleon if he wants to start a war: 1. against Austria, i.e. against the entire Holy Alliance, or 2. against Prussia, if the latter is dropped by Russia and Austria. However, the second is very doubtful and, as for his picking a quarrel with the Holy Alliance, this is most questionable. Neither England nor the Holy Alliance will abandon Piedmont, Switzerland and Belgium to him. The business is becoming so prettily entangled that in the end pure chance must decide.

And à l'intérieur, what splendid goings-on! Attempted assassina- tions almost a daily occurrence and the measures taken ever prettier. If only Mr de Morny, who still to some degree plays a virtuous hero, were at last thrown out, and if only the noble one 3

[^1]: were to confiscate the property of the Orleans.2

[^2]: a Louis Bonaparte





**[p. 13]**

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 ü m e

7

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 23 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Unfortunately my indisposition has up till now prevented me from writing to you this week, i.e. for your paper.3 With much effort I concocted an article for Dana,b who had received nothing from me for six weeks or more. For years, nothing has so pulled me down as this damned haemorrhoidal complaint, not even the last French fiasco.0 Enfin,6 I shall be all the better for having been forcibly kept away from the librarye for 4 weeks, hard though this was.

You will be getting two more articles about the 18th Brumaire/ of which the first will be dispatched, come what may, on Friday next and the other immediately afterwards, if not at the same time.

As for Lupus, I have been chivvying him a great deal and he seems to have made up his mind to take a retrospective look at Kossuth's Hungarian carrière9 for your paper. You have made two mistakes, first in failing to name Lupus along with ourselves in your announcement,28 and secondly in not approaching him direct Make good the second with a letter which you may enclose in one

[^1]: Enclosed Pieper's article.22

[^2]: a Die Revolution - b F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution, VII. - c An allu- sion to Louis Bonaparte's coup d'état of 2 December 1851. - d Well - e of the British Museum - f K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, III and IV. - 8 career





**[p. 14]**

Because I live some distance from Freiligrath and because I received Pieper's article only just before the post left, we have today been compelled to send you two letters instead of one.' This will be avoided next time.

Enclosed another statement from my friend Pfänder (Bauer no longer belongs to our League). You will have to publish it, since the Windmill Streeters' statement against him appeared in both the American and the European papers.24 It would be a good idea if, beneath this statement, you were to print the comment that it contains only what could be published under present police conditions (the accounts between Bauer and Pfänder on the one hand and the former League on the other, further, the control exercised by the Central Authority over the administration of those monies, we being in the majority on the C.A.—none of these things can, of course, be published yet); that, counting on the political precautions we, for our part, have to take in Germany, Arnold Winkelried Ruge,b that old gossip and 'Confusius'0 of European democracy, made an allusion to those matters (i.e. those of Pfänder and Bauer) about which he himself knew only from hearsay at 3rd or 4th hand, in the hope of incriminating myself and Engels in the eyes of the public, although the business was no concern of ours,d in just the same way as the jackass suggested that it was the Windmill Streeters who threw us out when it was we who had broken with that society,' as Pfänder's letter also implies.

You might also announce that a new workers' society has been formed in London under Stechan's chairmanship,25 which will keep aloof from 'Emigration', 'Agitation'26 and Great Windmill Street alike, and pursue a serious line.

Tu comprends, mon cher,1 that this society belongs to us, although we only send our younger people there; I refer to our 'heducatedg

people' not to our workers. They all go there.

[^1]: a See next letter. - b Arnold Ruge is ironically compared with Arnold Winkel- ried—a semi-legendary hero of the Swiss war of liberation against the Austrian yoke in the fourteenth century. - c A play on the resemblance between Confusius (confusion) and Confucius, the name of the Chinese philosopher. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement' (present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 535-36). - e See K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Statement on Resignation from the German Workers' Educational Society in London' (present edition, Vol. 10). - f You will understand, my dear fellow - 8 Marx uses Berlin dialect: jebildeten.





**[p. 15]**

Is A. Hentze our Hentze from Hamm? If so, I would write to him, for as it is Willich has done everything to blacken me in his eyes. L'infâme!b

Warmest regards from my family to yours.

Your

K. Marx

I am sending material for pamphlets, etc., all in one batch, likewise Jones' Notes.c Sent piecemeal, they cost too much. The Northern Star is no longer in O'Connor's hands but in those of a Chartist faction which is secretly in touch with the Financial and Parliamentary Reformers.28

8

Manchester, 23 January 1852

Dear Weydemeyer,

I hope that in the meantime you will have received my first letter, which I posted on 18 or 19 December in time for the STEAMER Africa.0 It contained an article written in haste and a letter,

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER12

[^3]: IN NEW YORK

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 19-20. - b The scoundrel! - c Notes to the People - d This letter has not been found.





**[p. 16]**

I am setded here in Manchester for the present, luckily in a position which, besides much independence, affords me various advantages; Marx and other friends occasionally come up from London to see me and, so long as Weerth is in Bradford, we arrange a regular shuttle-service between here and there, as the railway journey only takes 2 V2 hours. But now he will probably leave; he cannot abide that beastly hole, Bradford, and he's never happy anywhere if he has to spend more than a year sitting on his backside in the same place. I am considering a trip to the STATES, either next summer or, if there are no political changes in the meantime, the summer after that; to the STATES, New York, and particularly New Orleans. But this depends on my old man,b not me, and also on how things go in the cotton market.

Fifty copies of the Revolution is too much and the cost will probably be enormous, i.e. four shillings or more each time. In view of the wholesale arrests, dispersion, etc., and the German press laws, we can count on only a few subscribers here and, in Germany, only one or two at most in Hamburg, hence specimen numbers will be of no use to us. Newspapers, one or more to a wrapper, open at the sides, cost Id (2 cents) per sheet. So send 4 to me and 6-8 direct to London, for otherwise I have to restamp

[^1]: a F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer', I. - b Friedrich Engels senior, Engels' father





**[p. 17]**

In France, things are going splendidly. Yesterday evening the Patrie reported that the creation of a Police Ministry for de Maupas would be announced in today's Moniteur.1' De Morny who, along with Fould and a few others, represents the material interests of the bourgeoisie (but not their participation in political power) in the Cabinet, will be thrown out, and the reign of those died-in-the-wool adventurers Maupas, Persigny and Co. will begin. That will be the start of imperial true socialism30; the first socialist measure will be the confiscation of Louis Philippe's property,b for the Act of 6 August 1830, by which he left his property to his children instead of to the State as ancient custom demanded, is invalid. The portion of the Condé estates inherited by Aumale is also to be seized. The news might even arrive by next Saturday's STEAMER if things develop quickly enough. In the southern départements, the insurgents are still being hunted like game.31

The English Press is now the only reliable one for French news, and occasionally too, the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung. The paper in which you will find the best news about France is the London Daily News, which I therefore specially commend to you. The Tribune takes it, and you will certainly also be able to lay hands on it elsewhere, it being far too expensive to take. You will, I am sure, have no difficulty in finding it in the coffee houses of the CITY'S commercial quarter.

Dronke may soon be paying you a visit; I hear that anyone who has to leave Switzerland is sent via France only to America, not to England. But now he will be compelled to leave; as we have heard nothing whatever from him he must be in hiding.

Gnam, a former Baden artilleryman and brewer, who went over on the same ship as Heinzen, is a sterling fellow. With them went

[^1]: a The decree of 22 January 1852 on the creation of a Police Ministry under de Maupas and the decree of 22 January on the resignation of the Minister of the Interior de Morny and appointment of Persigny were printed in Le Moniteur universel, No. 23, 23 January 1852. - b The decree of 22 January 1852 on the confiscation of Louis Philippe's property was printed in Le Moniteur universel, No. 23, 23 January 1852.





**[p. 18]**

Below, a few supplementary notes on my remarks concerning the prospects for an invasion of England,32 which will explain things to you:

1. Any landing west of Portsmouth runs the risk of being forced into the wedge formed by Cornwall—hence impracticable.

2. Any landing too far north of, or too close to, Dover faces the same hazard between Thames and sea.

3. London and Woolwich—the first buts d'opération.3 Detach- ments to be sent against Portsmouth and Sheerness (Chatham). Strong occupation force in London, strong guard posts between the coast and London. Out of a landing force 150,000 strong, at least 60,000 needed for this purpose (and that not enough). Thus continuation of operations could proceed with 90,000 men.

4. Birmingham the second objective (on account of the arms factories). Secure the area south of the Bristol Channel and the Wash, i.e. a line from Gloucester to King's Lynn; in addition, a strong spearhead aimed at Birmingham. However weak and broken the opposing army might be, I consider this impossible with the 90,000 men available. But assuming it succeeds, no tenable defence position will have been won, particularly if the English Navy bestirs itself. The line will be too long and too weak. Hence it will be necessary to resume the advance.

5. Manchester the third objective; all country south of Mersey (or Ribble) and Aire (Humber) to be secured and this line to be held. It is shorter and more tenable, but here again the forces greatly weakened by the need to detach troops. Hence, since the defenders still have room and resources enough to reorganise, either the advance must continue, or else there must be an early retreat.

6. The first tenable line in the relatively narrow part of northern England, either the Tees or even better the Tyne (the line of the Roman wall against the Picts33) from Carlisle to Newcastle. But then the agricultural, industrial and commercial resources of the Scottish Lowlands still remain in the hands of the defenders.

[^1]: a objectives



