---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "10. Marx to Engels. 24 January "
Page_Range: "53-54"
---

# 10. Marx to Engels. 24 January 



**[p. 20]**

Do not print this stuff word for word, only make use of it. It is written in a very philistine style.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981 Published m English for the first time

10

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

No more than a few lines, since a letter has just arrived from Bermbach in Cologne which I would like to be in your hands tomorrow. It is essential that you 1. send me a letter TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES on the Cologne affair, together with a few lines which I shall send in advance of the corpus delicti3; 2. that you do the same in your own name to The Daily News although, of course, the actual corpus delicti, i.e. the insertion itself, will be signed 'A PRUSSIAN' or some such. I think that for The Times 'Doctor' and for The Daily News 'Manchester MERCHANT' would do better, i.e. have more chance of being accepted. Refer to people by their titles. Dr Becker, Dr (!) Bürgers, Dr Daniels, Dr Klein, Dr Jacobi, Otto (a chemist well known in German scientific circles), Röser and Nothjung. The Board of indicting magistrates at Cologne is the nee plus ultrab of cowardice. By the way, under the terms of the new disciplinary law, judges are, at least nominally, no longer 'irremovable'.

Your article for Danac is splendid. Of course I have only been able to send POOR Weydemeyer one more articled since you were here. This time my piles have afflicted me more grievously than the French Revolution. I shall

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of The Times' (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 210-11). - b the extreme - c F. Engels, Revolution and Counter- Revolution in Germany, VII. - d K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, II.



