---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "11. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 26 January "
Page_Range: "54-57"
---

# 11. Marx to Ferdinand Freiligrath. 26 January 



**[p. 21]**

Confiscation of the estates begged or stolen by the Orléans! Resignation of Fould! Persigny!35 Bravo! Ça marche!3

It is strange how ARMY, NAVY, COLONIES, FORTIFICATIONS AND THE WHOLE ADMINISTRATION have gone rotten under the rule of this curious regime of an aristocratic clique which the English bourgeois have by tradition lugged along with them at the head of the Executive power ever since 1688.m After all that English presumption and liberal outcry inspired by Kossuth, after the cosmopolitan- philanthropic-commercial hymns of peace during the EXHIBITION,37 in short, after this period of bourgeois megalomania, it is refreshing when the canaille now come to discover that not something, but everything, is rotten in the State of Denmark.*1

And then, too, these gents take an altogether too complacent view of the struggles on the Continent.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

Send back the two enclosed letters by return, Cluss', at any rate.

11

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

[London,] 26 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Freiligrath,

The verse you sent me to have a look at is delicious and expresses the corpus delicti in a masterly manner, but I believe it impairs the effect of the whole.38 D'abord,c is Kinkel a 'German

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels and K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Things are moving. - b Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, Scene 4. - c Firstly





**[p. 22]**

Since Engels-Weerth have not returned the copy of your first poemb which I sent them, all I had to offer red Wolffc yesterday were the few bits I knew by heart which, however, sufficed to bring on one of his fits of enthusiasm.

Quant à notre amid Ebner,40 he has undoubtedly had letters from Pieper, the best proof being that Pieper possesses a reply from him. Besides, he wrote him another long letter quite recently, excusing my silence on the grounds of my indisposition.

I have had a letter from Bermbach consisting of some 30 lines. He asks why he has not heard from me for so long. The answer is quite simple. I send about half a sheet to Cologne and, after a very long delay, receive in return a few lines, none of which ever answers my questions. For instance, never a word about Daniels' state of health and the like. You will get this letter as soon as it comes back from Manchester. Engels is going to use it for articles for the English papers.' There is nothing of importance in the scrawl save the following: The Board of indicting magistrates,

remarquez le bien,1 in view of the fact 'that there was no actual evidence of an indictable offence', rules that the investigation must start all over again. First then, on the basis of some stupid presumption, you have to spend 9 months in jug. Next, it transpires that there are no legal grounds for your being in jug. Conclusion: You must remain in jug until the examining magistrate finds himself à même9 to present 'actual evidence of an indictable offence' and, if the 'actual evidence' is not forthcoming, in gaol you remain until you rot.

[^1]: a good people - b F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer', I. - c Ferdinand Wolff - d As for our friend - e See this volume, p. 20. - f note it well - 8 in a position





**[p. 23]**

render them any thanks in the Lithographische Korrespondenz which he sustains with American funds. Les canailles!

If I knew of a safe bourgeois address in Cologne, I would write to Mrs Daniels and endeavour to reassure her to some extent about political conditions. From what Pieper tells me, it would seem that every counter-revolutionary advance is exploited by the 'worthy citizens' to alarm and vex her.

Enclosed a note from Miss Jenny to Master Wolfgang.0

Kind regards,

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in part in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Ergänzungshefte, No. 12, 12 April, Stutt- gart, 1912 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^2]: a Marx refers, in particular, to his article written for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 'The Prussian Counter-Revolution and the Prussian Judiciary'. - b Pun in the original on the name of Becker and 'hat gebacken' (has baked—figuratively, set up in the world) and the name of Bürgers and 'hat geborgen' (went security for). During the legal proceedings in May 1850 the Westdeutsche Zeitung, whose editor was Hermann Becker, came out in defence of Kinkel by publishing Bürgers' articles 'Die Logik in dem Prozesse Kinkels und Genossen' and 'Die Freisprechung Kinkels', Nos. 102-104, 107, 30 April, 1, 2 and 5 May 1850. See also this volume, pp. 34 and 570. - c Marx's daughter to Freiligrath's son



