---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "19. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 13 February "
Page_Range: "66-68"
---

# 19. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 13 February 



**[p. 18]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] Friday, 6 February 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I have just received your article." I am writing no more than a line or two, being short of time because of the departure of the mail for America and thus unable to go out to inquire about 'Richter'b until later.

I would, by the way, be glad if in the meantime you could send me the £ 2 by postal order. I shall be receiving SOME MONEY next week and shall then deliver the £ 2 to Pieper in your name. But it is important for me to have it at the beginning of the week whereas to him it can only be a matter of indifference, since he is well provided for just now.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, . . . Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

19

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 13 February 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

[^1]: MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER52

[^2]: Herewith the continuation of my article.0 T h e thing seems to grow of its own accord, and you will be getting two more articles about it. In addition I shall be sending you by the next post something on

[^3]: a F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, X. - b See this volume, p. 28. - c K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, IV.





**[p. 34]**

Herewith a note, which you should turn into an article, about the position of our imprisoned friends in Cologne.

These people have now been in jug getting on for ten months. In November the case went through the Ratskammer, and was referred to the Court of Assizes. Next the case came up before the Board of indicting magistrates which, before Christmas, delivered a verdict, which was motivated as follows: 'In consideration of the fact that there is no actual evidence of an indictable offence and hence no grounds for sustaining the charge' (but that, in view of the importance attached to the matter by the government, we fear for our posts if we drop the case against these people) 'we accordingly refer the case back to the first magistrate for instruction on various points.' The chief reason for this procrasti- nation is the government's conviction that, before a jury, it would fail ignominiously. Meanwhile it hopes to see the creation of a High Court for high treason, or at least the withdrawal of JURIES in all cases of political offences, to which end a petition has already been laid before the First Prussian Chamber. Our friends are locked up in cells, cut off from one another and from the world, may receive neither letters nor visits nor even books—things that are never denied common criminals in Prussia.

The Board could never have pronounced such an outrageous verdict had the Press evinced the least concern for the case. But liberal papers such as the Kölnische remained silent out of cowardice and 'democratic' ones (including the Lithographische Korrespondenz, published by Kinkel with the help of American money) out of hatred for the communists, out of fear of forfeiting some of their own importance, out of rivalry towards 'new' martyrs.34 Such is the gratitude shown by these curs to the N.Rh.Z., which always stood up for the democratic rabble whenever they clashed with the government (e.g. Temme et al). Such is the gratitude shown by Mr Kinkel to the Westdeutsche Zeitung, in which Becker was his hearth and Bürgers his haven.b

Greetings from my family to yours. y

K. M.

[^1]: Les canailles! Il faut les attaquer à mort.c

[^2]: a Die Revolution - b See this volume, p. 23. - c The scoundrels! They must be fought to the death.



