---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "20. Engels to Marx. 17 February "
Page_Range: "68-70"
---

# 20. Engels to Marx. 17 February 



**[p. 35]**

[From Jenny Marx]

We all of us long to hear from you, dear Mr Weydemeyer, but alas, one ship after another comes in without bringing news of you, your dear wife,3 your children, your paper, etc., etc. I trust you have safely received all the help sent from London. My husband has commandeered on your behalf pretty well all available communist quills (and has also turned to Germany), and some of these pieces, for instance Freiligrath's poem,b will assuredly secure circulation for your paper. If you could somehow contrive to publish pamphlets, I would beg you to think it over. We are in a very sad plight here, there being no more hope for us in Europe. My husband believes that his articles on France, which will run to two more,1 are of the greatest topical interest and would thus provide the most suitable material for a small pamphlet, if only as a sequel to his Revue articles.d If a New York bookseller were able to establish contact with Germany, he could count on not inconsiderable sales there. In any case the thing is written for Europe rather than America. However, we shall, of course, leave this to your own discretion. My husband further asks that you urge Dana to give us the name of a business house here in London where we can collect the fees with the minimum of delay. At this distance, Karl could not possibly give Dana any real idea of our circumstances or the urgency of the matter, since the situation was quite different when Dana knew us in Cologne and such a comfortably situated American has no idea how everything hangs in the balance here, and how ten shillings, coming at the right moment, can often rescue one from a horrifying situation. Sometime or other you may, perhaps, find an opportunity of telling him this personally. With kindest regards and warm greetings to your wife

20

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 17 February 1852

Dear Marx,

You will be furious with me for being so cursory, but I'll be damned if I know whether I'm coming or going, what with all this

from Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: a Louise - b F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer', I and II. - c K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. See also this volume, p. 40. - d K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850.

[^5]: Marx's letter is printed according to the original, Jenny Marx's note according to a copy in unknown hand

[^6]: Published in English in full for the first time





**[p. 36]**

You will have received the £2. I hope to hear from you soon, even if I don't have sufficient leizure to answer your last letter at length.

According to today's Daily News Louis Napoleon is certain to exhume Kaspar Hauser and to claim succession to the throne of Baden through his Aunt Stephanie. Voilà de grandes nouvelles pour le citoyen Seiler dont l'étoile va se lever incessamment.' Could you not persuade Kaspar Hauser's great historiang to write to Louis Napoleon and offer him his important sources on this matter? Il y a là de quoi faire un grand coup.

Your

F. E.

How is it that Weydemeyer sends no word? If a letter doesn't arrive by the Arctic tomorrow morning, I shall despair; something

[^1]: a Here are the facts. - b Roesgen - c Gottfried - d F. Engels, 'Real Causes Why the French Proletarians Remained Comparatively Inactive in December Last', I. - é for the series Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany - ' That's great news for Citizen Seiler, whose star will be constantly in the ascendant - s An allusion to Sebastian Seller's work Kaspar Hauser, der Thronerbe von Badens. - h A great deal could be made of that.



