---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "21. Marx to Engels. 18 February "
Page_Range: "70-71"
---

# 21. Marx to Engels. 18 February 

must have gone wrong. So far as I know, he has not written since 5 January, or at least I have heard nothing.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

2-1

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 February [1852] 28 Dean Street, Soho

I shall write to you at length on Saturday. Only a few lines today. I have not yet received the money that was promised me from home and so have not yet been able to hand over your £2 to Pieper, but have told him I have had a few lines from you in which you informed me that I should be receiving money for him from you. I hope I shall be able to pay him before the-week is out.

If your time is very much taken up, you would certainly do better to write for Dana than for Jones. The enclosed letter from Weydemeyer55 will show you even more plainly how essential it is not to interrupt these articles.a What must be done now is to redouble our attacks in the Tribune on the Frankfurt Left,56

especially when you come to the 'March Association'.57 To help you, I am today sending you Bauer's book* in which at least a few facts are to be found.

I again pray you to send me the issues of the 'Tribune' by return, since Johnson is the only Englishman to whom I can turn when in extremis0 — and I hover constantly on the brink. Don't forget it this time!

[^1]: a F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in German'). - h B. Bauer, Der Untergang des Frankfurter Parlaments. - c in extreme need



