---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "22. Engels to Marx. 19 February "
Page_Range: "71-72"
---

# 22. Engels to Marx. 19 February 



**[p. 38]**

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

22

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 19 February 1852

Dear Marx,

Despite tremendous efforts—your letter only arrived this morning—I have still not finished the article for Danab and it is now 11 o'clock at night. I have received the Bauerc—it is coming in very useful. In return, and whatever happens, you will receive 2 articles for Dana for next Tuesday's STEAMER. Since your letters reach Weydemeyer and mine don't, I'd be glad if you would forthwith dispatch the enclosed note to W.d in one of your own. It's an altogether curious business. It seems that two or three of my letters to my old man have also failed to reach him. Cela n'est pas clair."

Tell Jones he will be getting something from me next week, or write him a note to that effect. God knows why so many snags should crop up all at once and prevent me from getting down to anything. But on Saturday and Sunday I shall shut myself away, and then I hope to get something done.19

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'England'. - b for the series Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany.- c B. Bauer, Der Untergang des Frankfurter Parlaments. - d See this volume, pp. 39-40. - e It's not clear (Beaumarchais, La folle journée, ou le mariage de Figaro, Act. V, Scene 16).



