---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "23. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 February "
Page_Range: "72-73"
---

# 23. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 19 February 



**[p. 2]**

Your

F. E. Write some time giving me the exact address under which you have written to Weydemeyer.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

23

ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

Manchester, 19 February 1852

Dear Weydemeyer,

To my intense surprise I see from your letter of 6 Feb. per the Arctic that not one of my letters to you has arrived. I have sent you 4, if not 5, articles on England 17 and only desisted a fortnight ago because I had heard absolutely nothing from you: my last article went by the STEAMER which left on Saturday 31 Jan. from Liverpool, and concerned the REFORM BILL to be anticipated from little Russell. The first letters were addressed to Mr J. Weydemeyer, Deutsche Vereinsbuchhandlung, William Street, New York; the others to Mr J. W., 7 Chambers' Street, New York (City). Since this matter requires investigation, I am sending you this through Marx whose letters, it seems, are reaching you; I would ask you, 1. to go to the above places and see whether the letters were presented there; 2. if not, to go and in- quire at the N. Y. CITY POST OFFICE. If they are not to be found there, advise me by the first Liverpool STEAMER and I shall see what further steps can be taken here; I can easily get the thing into the newspapers over here if the local postmaster fails to give me a satisfactory answer. I posted several of the letters myself, the rest went with the business mail, and that proves that they were

[^1]: a L. Simon's 'Movements of the German Political Exiles', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3369, 4 February 1852. See also this volume, p. 37.



