---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "24. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 20 February "
Page_Range: "73-76"
---

# 24. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 20 February 

Make sure you send us L. Simon's Tribune article,3 either a cutting—giving the date of the issue—or the whole issue in a wrapper, since that sort of thing is always good reading.

My address is still the same.

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

24

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER ,2

[London,] 20 February 1852

Dear Weydemeyer,

I can send you nothing this week for the simple reason that for a week or more I have been so beset by money troubles that I have not even been able to' pursue my studies at the Library,6 let alone write articles.

However, I think that by Tuesday (the 24th) and Friday (the 27th) I shall be able to send you Nos. 5 and 6 of my article/ which are the concluding ones.

I received your letter, along with Cluss' concluding remarks on 18 February. You have been particularly unfortunate in two respects: 1. unemployment in New York; 2. the raging westerlies, which have driven vessels bound from London to America off course. For, with the exception of the early days, contributions have been sent you from England (by me, Engels, Freiligrath,

[^1]: IN NEW YORK

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 39. - b of the British Museum - c K. Marx, The Eighteenth

[^3]: Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.





**[p. 41]**

If, by the by, you wish to receive regular support from here, you will have to fulfil the following conditions:

1. Write every week and give the date of the letters you have received from us.

2. Keep us fully au courant with everything over there and regularly supplied with relevant documents, etc., newspaper cuttings, etc.

You will realise, mon cher,h how difficult it is to contribute to a paper on the other side of the ocean without any knowledge of its readers, etc. But if you fulfil the above conditions I can guarantee you the necessary contributions. I am here at their backs, WHIP in hand, and shall have no difficulty in keeping their noses to the grindstone. From Germany, too, I have received promises on your behalf of contributions and collaboration. If I only knew that the paper would survive, I would have someone in Paris who is READY to send you a weekly contribution gratis. I shall write to the man,c

who is one of my best and most intelligent friends. The worst of it is that no one likes to work pour le roi de Prusse,d and daily reports lose all value if not published immediately on arrival. Since, then, you are unable to make any payment, it is all the more necessary to convince people that they are doing real party work and that their letters are not being pigeonholed.

It seems to me that you are making a mistake in having your letters delivered instead of doing what every newspaper must do, that is, advise the Post Office that you will have them collected regularly on the arrival of a vessel. In this way misunderstandings and delays are more easily avoided.

Apropos. Do not print Hirsch's statement14 if you have not already done so.

A mass of blackguards is leaving here for New York (amongst them tailor Lehmann and tailor Joseph Meyer). Some of them will approach you in my name. But don't trust anyone who does not bring with him a few lines in my writing. The fellows will serve

[^1]: a Die Revolution - b my dear fellow - c R. Reinhardt - d for the king of Prussia, i.e. for nothing





**[p. 42]**

As for Dana, I think it was foolish of him to accept articles from Simon.a If my money-box allowed, I should immediately refuse to send him any further contributions. Let him publish attacks on myself and Engels but not by such an impertinent nincompoop. It's sheer stupidity to permit Agitation and Emigration,26 those twin fictions which exist only on newspaper pages, to be presented to the American public as historical realities by a vain fellow who has imposed upon Germany the Prussian Emperor,58 the March Associations5V and the Imperial Regent, Vogt, and now, with his bankrupt accomplices, would like to impose himself afresh upon the people, along with Parliament and a somewhat modified Imperial constitution. Rien de plus ridicule que ce gredin-là qui du haut des Alpes laisse tomber des paroles d'homme d'état!1 I should have credited Dana with more tact. Ludwig Simon—von Trier! When will this fellow drop his patent of parliamentary nobility?

Here in London, you know, all these fellows have completely drifted apart. The only thing that keeps them in any way together is the prospect of being redeemed by Gottfried Christ Kinkel's money. On the other hand we have that idiot Ruge, together with Ronge and two or 3 other jackasses, who conceal their lazy still-life by calling it 'agitation', just as a stagnant swamp might be dubbed 'open sea'.

Europe, of course, is now busying itself with other troubles than these. Ledru-Rollin himself has collapsed here like a punctured balloon since 2 Decemberc and the arrival of new revolutionary elements from France. Mazzini is making ultra-reactionary speeches, one of which I shall shortly analyse for you.

As regards Ernest Jones' Notes to the People, in which you will find all the day-to-day history of the English proletariat, I shall send you it as soon as my financial circumstances permit. I have to pay 8 shillings every time I send a parcel to America.

Give Cluss my warm regards. We are eagerly awaiting his letters. Why haven't you sent us his statement60?

I, together with my wife, Freiligrath and wife,d and Lupus, all send our heart-felt greetings to your wife, whom please assure of

[^1]: a In particular L. Simon's 'Movements of the German Political Exiles', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3369, 4 February 1852. - b There's nothing more ridiculous than this scoundrel who, from Alpine heights, lets fall these statesmanlike pronouncements. - c coup d'état in France on 2 December 1851 - d Ida



