---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "25. Marx to Engels. 23 February "
Page_Range: "76-79"
---

# 25. Marx to Engels. 23 February 



**[p. 43]**

Farewell.

Your

K. Marx

If it does not work out with your newspaper, could you not bring out my pamphlet,3 sheet by sheet or, if possible, in sections as sent to you? Otherwise it will take too long.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English in full for the first time

25

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 23 February [1852]

DEAR Frederic,

I must again chivvy you about the Tribune since I am myself being chivvied daily by Johnson.b I would also ask you to send me such documents as you may have received from Weydemeyer. The address you gave for Weydemeyer was perfectly correct.

Apropos. By Pfänder's account the Straubinger61 Richter is a creature of Willich's.

E. Jones has been puffing your article for all he is worth without, of course, mentioning your name.c He has been compelled thus to cry his wares by competition from Harney who has got hold of some money, the devil knows where from, and has large advertising waggons driving round the CITY, with the legend 'READ THE FRIEND OF THE PEOPLE', the paper being displayed and on sale in all socialist SHOPS.

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - b See this volume, pp. 32 and 37. - c F. Engels, 'Real Causes Why the French Proletarians Remained Comparatively Inactive in December Last'. See also [E. Jones,] 'Continental Notes', Notes to the People, No. 43, 21 February 1852.





**[p. 44]**

Russell has been overthrown in the drollest possible manner.62 I can ask nothing more than that Derby should take the helm. During this short session you will have seen how pitiable the Manchester men 63 can be when not driven by la force des choses.1 I don't hold it against these fellows. Each successive democratic

[^1]: Enclosed a letter from Reinhardt, which contains some pretty cancans.e

[^2]: a burning question - b Poor chap! - c a kick - d Citizen Fröbel will have acted as intermediary. - e gossip. Excerpts from Reinhardt's letter see on pp. 47-49 of this volume. - f force of circumstances





**[p. 45]**

Yesterday I was talking to a French MERCHANT just come from Paris. Business wretched. And do you know what the jackass said? Bonaparte fait pire que la république. Les affaires allaient mieux.b It is truly fortunate that the French bourgeois should always hold their government responsible for commercial crises. No doubt Bonaparte is also to blame for the unemployment in New York and the bankruptcies in London.

Another very interesting piece of information (tu sens ici l'influence de l'illustre Seilerc) about Bonaparte. Bangya, as I have already told you, is connected with Szemere and Batthyâny.d He is an agent of the latter's. He confided to me that Batthyâny and Czartoryski are in collusion with Bonaparte and see him nearly every day. He wants to secure allies behind the backs of Russia and Austria amongst the aristocratic émigrés and those streaming in from Poland and Hungary and has, moreover, definitely told them that, in spite of Nicholas and all the rest, he is going to invade Belgium and perhaps Baden as well, and this in the near future.

Ewerbeck has sent me 12 copies of his bulky work, L'Allemagne et les Allemands. One for you. Nothing quite like it has ever been seen or heard of before. The historical part, which begins ab ovo,e

is copied from out-dated primers. You may judge how competent he is as regards more recent history from the following particulars: F. List introduced the doctrine of Free Trade, and Ruge that of social science, into Germany. Hegel has immortalised himself by (literally) enlightening the Germans on the categories of quality, quantity, etc., and Feuerbach has proved that men cannot extend their knowledge beyond the range of human understand- ing. Pedro Düsar (brother of the Struve woman) is one of the greatest German men of liberty, and Freiligrath made his name as a collaborateur on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. On top of that a style à pouffer de rire,1 e.g. how Jason's warriors grew from dragon's teeth, which is why the German tribes are perpetually at odds with one another. Romulus Augustulus était un jeune homme doux et agréable^ and for three hundred years Germans have been

[^1]: a in case of need - b is doing worse than the Republic. Business used to be better. - c here you may descry the influence of the illustrious Seiler - d See this volume, p. 31. - e from the egg—from the very beginning - f to make one split one's sides - K was a nice, gentle young man



