---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "26. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 23 February "
Page_Range: "79-82"
---

# 26. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 23 February 



**[p. 46]**

bêtes.3

Have you read Mazzini's simple-minded infamous speech?

Your

K. M.

First published much abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t , m e

1929

26

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN DÜSSELDORF

London, 23 February 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Lassalle,

similarly failed to arrive. Knowing how punctilious you are about answering, I can only attribute the delay in hearing from you to some accident.

Since I last wrote my state of health has again improved, although I am still having much trouble with my eyes. My social circumstances, on the other hand, have deteriorated. I have had a definite refusb from the publisher in respect of my Economy45; my anti-Proudhon manuscript/ which for the past year has been wandering around Germany, has likewise failed to find a berth; the financial crisis has finally reached a level comparable only to the commercial crisis now making itself felt in New York and London. Unlike the gentlemen of commerce, I cannot, alas, even have recourse to bankruptcy. Mr Bonaparte was in similar straits when he chanced his coup d'état.

[^1]: I should greatly like to know whether my second letter65

[^2]: a beasts - b rejection - c K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy.





**[p. 47]**

'All in all, the mood of the Parisian public has experienced a noticeable change and, even though it has as yet not gone beyond resignation, this last is felt all the more genuinely and grimly, and far more generally. The main reason for this, among the middle and lower classes, is that trade and hence employment, despite initial favourable appearances, simply cannot be got going, whereas those same classes had sacrificed all other considerations to the hope that these things would improve. And then the slow-witted majority of the less advanced workers —which places more hope in the Republic than in the monarchies of long and bitter memory—has, as a result of Napoleon's decrees, gradually come to realise that the President is in no way concerned with the preservation of the Republic; and he has done himself great harm in the eyes of property owners by confiscating the Orleans' estates, a measure which, after all, sets a dangerous official example. Chaps such as Fould, de Morny and Dupin—for reasons of private interest of course—have even refused to subscribe to this measure, a fact all the more striking on account of their spotless antecedents, which are more or less common knowledge. As for Dupin, the President of the defunct National Assembly, it has since been learnt that his last pretty move was to suppress, on the morning of 2 December and with the connivance of Bonaparte, a letter from the Archbishop of Paris inviting the representatives to assemble in the church of Notre Dame while he himself intended to stand in the porch to protect them, in their capacity as the representatives of popular sovereignty, against the soldiers of the usurper. This might have given quite a different turn to the whole thing, the more so since the haute cour de justice' had assembled at the same time and had already begun to register a protest against the coup d'état.

[^1]: 'As for de Morny, the minister who resigned with Dupin, he was known as the escrocd of his mistress' (Countess Lehon's) husband, a circumstance which caused Emile de Girardin's wife to say that while it was not unprecedented for governments to be in the hands of men who were governed by their wives, none had ever been known to be in the hands of hommes entretenus.? Well, at present this same Countess Lehon holds a salon where she is one of Bonaparte's most vociferous opponents and it was she who, on the occasion of the confiscation of the Orleans' estates, let fall the well-known witticism: "C'est le premier vol de l'aigle."f

[^2]: Because of this remark of his wife's, Emile de Girardin was expelled. Rémusat's expulsion is attributed to a similar cause. The latter is said to have arrived one morning at the Ministry of the Interior where Morny had installed young Lehon as

[^3]: Chef de Bureau; upon catching sight of Rémusat, Lehon rudely asked him his name, whereat R. replied: "Monsieur, dans ma famille on porte le nom de son père, c'est pourquoi je me nomme de Rémusat." s At much the same time Lehon is said to have

[^4]: a Reinhardt - b a friend who is very sceptical and does not have the highest opinion of the people. Now, listen: - c High Court of Justice - d swindler - e kept men - f 'It is the first flight (theft) of the eagle.' (This witticism and Madame de Girardin's remark cited above are used by Marx in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 196-97.) - s 'In my family, sir, we bear our father's name. That's why I am called de Rémusat.'





**[p. 48]**

'Having both before and after fallen out with every party without exception, Bonaparte is seeking a counterbalance by means of this or that popular measure—vast expansion of public works, prospects of a general amnesty for the participants of 2 December, etc.—just as he will soon attempt something similar by means of this or that measure in favour of this or that class, and all without consistency of purpose. And what matters most of all is his failure to win back the masses, since he is unable to give them bread, i.e. any source of labour for their livelihood, and has actually deprived them of their favourite pastime, the innocent consolation they derived from the trees of liberty and the republican inscriptions in the streets; similarly they can no longer while away an hour in the wine and coffee shops, since all political discourse is strictly prohibited there. The peaceable bourgeois are angered by the loss of their hobby-horse, the National Guard Nor do they fancy those aristocratic routs, the state balls, from which they stay away; thus, apart from foreigners and two or three Parisian exceptions, the only people to attend the last, splendide, Tuileries ball were ladies of doubtful virtue. The reckless squandering that goes on is a source of disquiet to the thrifty citizens, who look ahead to the day when the Orleans funds will be exhausted.

[^1]: 'What particularly offends all who have a modicum of intelligence is the destruction of the Press.

[^2]: 'Again, die organisation of the resuscitated Police Ministry and the spy system associated with it generates bad blood throughout the départements. The Parisian salons are again full of distinguished, unsuspected informers, just as in the days of the Empire.

[^3]: 'And all the time much tripotagee on the Bourse on the part of those who, in

[^4]: a 'What, it's you, you scoundrel, who dares to come and tell me of my expulsion?' - b respectable people - c government of thieves and murderers - d 'It is the total and definitive victory of socialism!' - e sharp practice



