---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "27. Marx to Engels. 27 February "
Page_Range: "82-85"
---

# 27. Marx to Engels. 27 February 



**[p. 49]**

So much for my ami. The important news from here is that the Tories have replaced the Whigs, and formed a ministry headed by the Earl of Derby (Lord Stanley).62 This événement is splendid. In England our movement can progress only under the Tories. The Whigs conciliate all over the place and lull everyone to sleep. On top of that there is the commercial crisis, which is looming ever closer and whose early symptoms are erupting on every hand. Les choses marchent} If only we can manage tant bien que malc through the interim period! It is nearly time for the post. I must close.

Salut.

K. Marx

27

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 27 February 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I see that last time I forgot Reinhardt's letter.d The article has gone off to Dana,e who has not yet replied to my request that he advise me of a business house here in London. Despite her

[^1]: First published in F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. Ill, Stutt- eart-Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a event - b Things are moving. - c somehow - d See this volume, pp. 47-49. - e F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, XI.





**[p. 50]**

I shall not be writing at length today, being busy with the dictation of an article for Weydemeyerd and the dispatch and correction of the other contributions for him.

I see from the Augsburg paper (through the humble offices of Seiler) that Mr Stirner has produced a 'history of the counter- revolution'. e He tries to prove that the revolution collapsed because it was 'sacrosanct' whereas the counter-revolution pre- vailed because of its 'egoistical' stance.

On 25 February the French held a February banquet, or rather a dry MEETING accompanied by tea and sandwiches. I and wife were invited. The rest of the public had to pay 1 franc to go in. Since I neither could nor wished to attend, I sent my wife there with a FRENCHMAN. Ledru, Pyat, Thoré, Martin Bernard, etc., in short the whole Rollinist clique by whom the affair had been mooted, failed to appear because they considered the entrée,1 for the benefit of the refugees, to be beneath their dignity. L. Blanc had also cried off. Only the lowest dregs of the emigration were there, most of whom style themselves Blanquists. But the little pseudo-Corsicang

was waiting in some near-by parlour; after being assured by his spies of the absence of Ledru and Co., he appeared and, in view of the total lack of talent and authority, his natty, steel-blue tail-coat was received with RAPTUROUS APPLAUSE. His speech, after which he immediately departed, sent his enemies into transports. Enchanted them. Vanquished them. And what did THAT LITTLE MAN say, that Johnny Russell of socialism? That here abroad, people were wondering at the strange events in France, that he believed more firmly than ever in the star de la patrie.h And why? Je veux, said he, vous expliquer le mouvement historique,1 etc. Namely, that in

[^1]: a Henriette Marx - b Louise von Westphalen - c Heinrich Georg von Westphalen - d K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, V. - e An anonymous review of M. Stirner's Geschichte der Reaction in Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 56, 25 February 1852, Supplement: 'Buchmacherei' - f entrance fee - S Louis Blanc - h of the fatherland - • I wish, said he, to explain historical tendencies to you.





**[p. 51]**

he collects around him for his orgies. Then he begins to curse and swear. 'Mais c'est un militaire!',1 says one of his lady acquaintances in exoneration. Addio.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und , K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t , m e

[^2]: 1929

[^3]: a Frederick the Great, Napoleon the great, there are great victories and great reverses. Well, France is a military nation. - b Poverty, hideous poverty. - c Poverty is not something permanent, something tangible - d the mother will no longer destroy with her own hands the fruit of her womb, the little seven-year-old girl will no longer 'huddle' beneath the machine - e 1. an adventurer, 2. a bastard and 3. his uncle's (i.e. Napoleon I's) pantograph - f What do you say to that? - 8 philistines - h males and little females - ' 'But he's a soldier.'



