---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "28. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 27 February "
Page_Range: "85-88"
---

# 28. Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 27 February 



**[p. 52]**

ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER 12

IN NEW YORK

Manchester, 27 Feb. 1852

Dear Weydemeyer,

I am glad to see that some of my letters have at last arrived and hence that no further obstacles stand in the way of our correspondence.66 The first two were addressed to J. W., Deutsche Vereinsbuchhandlung, William Str., New York. The copies of the Revolution and the Demokrat have arrived safely and are being forwarded to London today. Mr Heinzen will be delighted by your riposte.11 You summed him up very neatly. Send all further consignments of printed matter in the same way, open at both ends; the postage costs very little.

Of my articles, you could at very most include only the one on the invasion67 in any future miscellany. The others are unsuitable and have already been overtaken by events.

As for confrère Standau, the fellow's an erstwhile conspirator who fits exactly into the category we depicted in the Revue, in the critique of Chenu h—very useful in certain respects, very prone to idleness, not always reliable and something of a Rodomonte. Anyhow, give him my regards.

Schmidt of Löwenberg is conducting a crusade against the Jesuits in the neighbourhood of St. Louis and has for chief ally the ex-trickster and agent of Duchâtel, Mr Börnstein of Parisian fame. What else he is up to I do not know. That Dr Maas is a supporter of the Marx clique is news to me. I know him only as an ex-Palatinate ranter. Fischer, the editor of the New Orleans Deutsche Zeitung, is an acquaintance of mine and was a member of my bodyguard in Kaiserslautern,68 but this day-dreamer has since become infernally corrupted and Kinkelified, and if Kinkel himself has been in New Orleans, he will have done a great deal of mischief since he will have met with no opposition.

[^1]: 3 An allusion to Weydemeyer's article against Heinzen, New-Yorker Demokrat, No. 311, 29 January 1852. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Reviews from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, No. 4: 'Les Conspirateurs, par A. Chenu', 'La naissance de la République en février 1848, par Lucien de la Hodde'.





**[p. 53]**

just now it interests me primarily as a military problem which one tries to elucidate and solve in just the same way as an exercise in geometry. But I do not regard a coalition war of this kind as out of the question although for the time being, so long as Derby remains at the helm, it will certainly be deferred. The gentlemen of the Holy Alliance69 assess their forces today no less incorrectly than was done in the various coalitions from 1792 to 1807. And as for Russia's dependence on England, 1. one cannot expect the Tsar b to be sensible of it, and secondly, a suspension of trade, while it would result in stagnation, poverty and the spoiling of produce, could, after all, be endured for 2-3 years just as could a commercial crisis of the same duration. Bear in mind that in Russia virtually no money circulates in the country among the peasantry, the vast majority, and that these barbarians' every household necessity can be produced in any village. True, the cities and the aristocracy would suffer, but the Russian Empire is founded on peasants and on petty country gentry. An uprising on the Continent instigated by England presents great difficulties; Spain was helped by her terrain, her great size and sparse popu- lation, and the lack of provisions, and also the fact of being sur- rounded on nearly all sides by the sea. But Hungary and Poland are land-locked countries while Italy, save for the islands, could hardly be held by the English and the insurgents against the superior forces of the coalition. Furthermore, England is not now in a position, and will not be so a year after the outbreak of war, to muster an army like the one sent to Wellington in Spain.70 But ships without a landing forcé can never gain a foothold.

It's a real stroke of luck that the Tories should have taken the helm. As a result of the continual victories in the field of com- mercial policy and the long era of prosperity, the manufacturers had grown thoroughly indolent. Parliamentary reform, even when more far-reaching than Russell's paltry Bill,71 failed to arouse the slightest interest. Now, with the devil hard on their heels, they are already scared out of their wits, the more so since every one of the new ministers represents, and most brazenly, some aspect or other of protectionism. The Anti-Corn Law League72 is being re- vived here. Parliamentary reform, the extension of the franchise, the equalisation of constituencies, secret ballot, have all become questions of vital moment to the industrial bourgeoisie, whereas before

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 18-19. - b Nicholas I





**[p. 54]**

But they are still in the minority and, should Derby dare to propose the immediate introduction of protective tariffs, he will unquestionably take a tumble. But he may be cunning enough to defer this. At any rate the movement is now FAIRLY under way in England. With Palmerston's dismissal-74 the fun began, as it was bound to do after the endless ministerial defeats of the previous session. Derby is the second act. Dissolution will be the third. As for England's foreign policy under Derby it too, of course, will be reactionary; but little that is decisive will happen; maybe a few prosecutions of refugees, in which the government will fail, attempts to introduce Aliens Bills,75 which will likewise fail, perhaps support for attempts to form an anti-Louis Napoleon coalition, which will also come to nothing. The Tories are frightfully circumscribed in England and, unless they attempt to restore the Sidmouth-Castlereagh despotism of 1815-21, whereby they could burn their fingers devilish badly for, within the law and on behalf of FREE TRADE, your English bourgeois fights like a tiger—the conservative gentlemen will make sorry fools of themselves. But Derby (formerly, in his father's lifetime, Lord Stanley) is a hot-head and may well have recourse to extreme, if not illegal, measures.

All that is lacking now is a commercial crisis and, with Derby up, I rather suspect that it will soon be upon us. The rapid succession ' of English FREE TRADE measures, followed by the opening up of the Dutch colonies, the lowering of tariffs in Spain, Sardinia, etc., etc., and the fall in cotton prices (since Sept. 1850 down to half their former value), are keeping prosperity going longer than might have been expected. But, given the state of the Indian and to some extent the American markets (appreciably fewer manufactures were exported to the United States last month than in the same period last year), the thing cannot be expected to last much longer. If, as seems hardly probable, the crisis comes as early as May, then the fun will begin. But it will hardly be here before September or October.

My regards to your wife.

Your

F. E.

