---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "30. Marx to Engels. 5 March "
Page_Range: "91-93"
---

# 30. Marx to Engels. 5 March 



**[p. 58]**

The last balance sheet made my old man really hopping mad for it shows him as having lost money, despite the general prosperity, and he is likely to give notice of termination (i.e. of his corporate contract with the Ermens). In which case this business will probably shut down as early as next year. The chaos arising out of all these goings-on has now reached a peak, and is partly why I have such a mass of things to do.

Don't bother to send me Ewerbeck's book. It's not worth the 6d the postage would cost.

My warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t i m e

1929

30

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 5 March [1852] 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Your package containing the Revolution and the Tribune had been opened. They had not even taken the trouble to do it up again.

From the enclosed letter you will see how we stand with the police.80 The facts are wrong, save that Lupus took the chair

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: I received the £5 on Monday, although Lupus lives at 3, not 4, Broad Street. Also today your very felicitous article for Dana.a

[^3]: F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, XII.



With regard to Weydemeyer's anti-Heinzen article/ Jones has sent him by today's post an official letter in which he treats Heinzen avec un dédain suprèmed and enlightens him on the 'WAR OF CLASSES'.82 The day before yesterday the National Reform League83

held a big meeting with an audience of at least 2,000. Jones subjected Messrs Hume, Walmsley and Co. to some rough treatment and scored a real triumph. London and Manchester now seem to divide the work between them in such a way that the bourgeois there tend to launch political attacks, and those here commercial ones.

A few days ago a manifesto by Signore Mazzini written in Italian fell into my hands. He is the holy bourgeois quand même' and fumes at the 'profane' French bourgeois. He shifts the initiative from Paris to Rome. 'II materialismo' and 'il egoismo' have ruined France. The workers have inherited both vices from the bourgeoisie. Since 1815 France has no longer been the country of initiative. Italy and Hungary are now the chosen countries.

While 'signore Mazzini', as Peter the Hermit, castigates the wicked French, he licks the boots of the English FREE TRADERS who doubtless personify 'le dévouement' and 'la foi'. L'imbécile!1

Please return the enclosed letter. Only very little today because what with getting things off to America my hands are full.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'To the Editor of The Times' - b the Communist League - c See this volume, p. 52. - d with supreme disdain - e all the same - ' 'devotion' and 'faith'. The idiot!

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



