---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "31. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 5 March "
Page_Range: "93-99"
---

# 31. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 5 March 



**[p. 31]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER84

IN NEW YORK

London, 5 March 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weywy,

I am afraid there has been a bit of a muddle because, HAVING MISUNDERSTOOD THY LAST LETTER, I addressed the last 2 packages to: Office of the Revolution, 7 Chambers' Street, Box 1817. What caused the confusion was that damned 'Box 1817', since you had written telling me to append this to the 'old address' without drawing any distinction between the first address and the second. But I hope the matter will have resolved itself before this letter arrives, the more so since last Friday's letter3 contained the very detailed fifth instalment of my article. This week I was prevented from finishing the sixth, which is also the last one.85 If your paper is appearing again, this delay will not prove an obstacle since you have an ample supply of material.

Your article against Heinzen, unfortunately sent to me too late by Engels, is very good, at once coarse and fine, and this is the right combination for any polemic worthy of the name. I have shown this article to Ernest Jones and enclosed you will find a letter from him addressed to you, intended for publication.82 Since Jones writes very illegibly and with abbreviations, and since I assume that you are not yet an OUT-AND-OUT Englishman, I am sending you, along with the original, a copy made by my wife, together with the German translation; you should print them both, the original and the translation, side by side. Below Jones' letter you might add the following comment: As to George Julian Harney, likewise one of Mr Heinzen's authorities, he published our Communist Manifesto in English in his Red Republican with a marginal note describing it as 'THE MOST REVOLUTIONARY DOCUMENT EVER GIVEN TO THE wo RLD',b and in his Democratic Review he translated the

[^1]: a Jenny Marx's letter to Joseph Weydemeyer of 27 February 1852. See this volume, pp. 572-73. - b The Communist Manifesto was published in English in The Red Republican, Nos. 21, 22, 23, 24 of 9, 16, 23 and 30 November 1850. It was on this occasion that Marx and Engels were first named as its authors. In this letter Marx gives the quotations in English followed by the German translation.





**[p. 61]**

* 'We shall endeavour to terminate that strife of classes which, of late years, has exercised so pernicious in influence over the welfare of this kingdom.*0

Whereupon The Times of 2 March comments:

* 'If anything would ever divide classes in this country beyond reconciliation, and leave no chance of a just and honourable peace, it would be a tax on foreign corn.' *

And lest some ignorant 'man of character"1 like Heinzen should suppose that the iristocrats are for and the bourgeois against the Corn Laws72 because the former want 'monopoly' and the latter 'freedom'—your worthy citizen sees opposites only in this ideologi- cal form—we shall content ourselves with saying that, in England, in the eighteenth century, the aristocrats were for 'freedom' (of trade) and the bourgeois for 'monopoly',—precisely the same attitude as is adopted by the two classes in present-day 'Prussia' towards the 'Corn Laws'. 6 There is no more rabid FREETRADER than the Neue Pr. Z.

Finally, if I were you, I should tell the democratic gents en general that viiey would do better to acquaint themselves with bourgeois literature before they venture to yap at its opponents. For instance they should study the historical works of Thierry, Guizot, John Wade and so forth, in order to enlighten themselves as to the past 'history of the classes'. They should acquaint

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850. Published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. By the English translation of this work Marx means Engels' review of the first chapter published under the tide 'Two Years of a Revolution; 1848 and 1849' in The Democratic Review, April-June 1850. - b [G. J. Harney,] Review of Louis Blanc's Historic Pages from the French Revolution of February 1848 in The Democratic Review, May 1850, pp. 465- 66. - c Here and below Marx quotes from Disraeli's 'Address to His Constituents' published under the date-line: 'London, Tuesday, 2 March 1852', The Times, No. 21052, 2 March 1852. - d Presumably an allusion to Heine's satirical poem Atta Troll, Chap. XXIV—'kein Talent, doch ein Charakter' (Talent none, but character).

[^2]: 4—2736





**[p. 62]**

* 'The produce of the earth—all that is derived from its surface by the united application of labour, machinery, and capital, is divided among three classes of the community; namely the proprietor of the land, the owner of the stock or capital necessary for its cultivation, and the labourers by whose industry it is cultivated.'*a

Now, in the United States bourgeois society is still far too immature for the class struggle to be made perceptible and comprehensible; striking proof of this is provided by C. H. Carey (of Philadelphia),1" the only North American economist of any note. He attacks Ricardo, the most classic representativec of the bourgeoisie and the most stoical opponent of the proletariat, as a man whose works are an arsenal for anarchists and socialists, for all enemies of the bourgeois order.d He accuses not only him, but also Malthus, Mill, Say, Torrens, Wakefield, Mac Culloch, Senior, Whately, R. Jones, etc.—those who lead the economic dance in Europe—of tearing society apart, and of paving the way for civil war by showing that the economic bases of the various classes are such that they will inevitably give rise to a necessary and ever-growing antagonism between the latter. He tries to refute them, not, it is true, like the fatuous Heinzen, by relating the existence of classes to the existence of political privileges and monopolies, but by seeking to demonstrate that economic conditions: rent (landed property), profit (capital) and wages (wage labour),' rather than being conditions of struggle and antagonism, are conditions of association and harmony. All he proves, of course, is that the 'undeveloped' relations in the United States are, to him, 'normal relations'.

Now as for myself, I do not claim to have discovered either the existence of classes in modern society or the struggle between them. Long before me, bourgeois historians had described the historical development of this struggle between the classes, as had bourgeois economists their economic anatomy. My own contribu- tion was 1. to show that the existence of classes is merely bound up with certain historical phases in the development of production; 2. that the class struggle necessarily leads to the dictatorship of the

[^1]: a D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, Third Edition, London, 1821, p. V. - b See H. Ch. Carey, Essay on the Rate of Wages - c Above 'representative' Marx wrote 'interpreter'. - d See also this volume, pp. 345- 46. - e ibid., pp. 378-84 and 392.



'S

lp-^;:ü.«ÖÄi S

[^1]: • K

[^2]: Third page of Marx's letter to Weydemeyer of 5 March 1852







**[p. 65]**

Select from the above notes whatever you think fit.88 By the way, Heinzen has adopted our 'centralisation' in place of his 'federative republic', etc.89 When the views on classes we are now disseminat- ing have become familiar objects of 'sound common sense',b then the scoundrel will proclaim them aloud as the latest product of his 'own sagacity' and yap his opposition to our onward progress. Thus, in the light of his 'own sagacity', he yapped at Hegelian philosophyc

so long as it was progressive. Now he feeds on its stale scraps, spat out undigested by Ruge.

Herewith also the end of the Hungarian article.*1 It is all the more essential that you should try to make some use of this—assuming your paper exists—because Szemere, the erstwhile prime minister of Hungary, now in Paris, has promised me to write a long article for you, signed with his own name.

If your paper has come into being, send more copies so that it can be distributed more widely.

Your

K. Marx

Kind regards to you and your wife from all your friends here, especially my wife.

Apropos. I am sending you the Notese and a few copies of my Assizes speech* (this last for Cluss, to whom I promised it) by the

[^1]: a the uttermost point - b An allusion to Heinzen's expression 'sound common sense' (der gesunde Menschenverstand). See K. Marx, 'Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality', present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 317, 330 and 337. - c An allusion to Heinzen's comedy Doktor Nebel, oder: Gelehrsamkeit und Leben, Cologne, 1841. See K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile, present edition, Vol. 11, p. 277. - d See this volume, p. 32. - e Notes to the People - f K. Marx, 'The First Trial of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung' and 'The Trial of the Rhenish District Committee of Democrats' in Zwei politische Prowsse, Cologne, 1849.



