---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "33. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 25 March "
Page_Range: "103-105"
---

# 33. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 25 March 



**[p. 33]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER12

IN NEW YORK

London, 25 March 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Good luck to the new world citizen! There is no more splendid time to enter this world than the present. Come the day when people can travel from London to Calcutta in a week, both our heads will long since have rolled or started to loll. And Australia and California and the Pacific Ocean! The new world citizens will be unable to comprehend how small our world once was.

If you did not receive the final instalment3 enclosed herewith a week ago, your total silence is to blame.

Now in the pamphlet,97 too, I would like my article to be divided up as it was sent to you, under headings I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII. These figures serve as sign-posts for the reader. They take the place of titles. At the end of V, add the following words: 'But Bonaparte answered the Party of Order as Agesilaus did King Agis: "J seem to thee an ant, but one day I shall be a lion.'"98 But the thing must, of course, be brought out now all at once in its entirety.

Where my wife has failed to leave space enough to indicate the paragraphs, I have marked them with a T .

Cluss' statement60 is splendid. Why not—it strikes me as a good idea—include Ernest Jones' letter in your first issue?82 A couple of introductory words would suffice to explain it.

Maintenant: Cluss will already have told you about the Szemere business." First a publisher will have to be contacted through me and arrangements made for his pamphlet—some 10 sheets—on Kossuth, L. Batthyâny and Görgey—to be brought out in German and later in English. You might, if it can be managed, publish the German original as your second instalment without, of course, any other additions. But the publisher must pay for the thing if you don't publish it yourself.

[^1]: a of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, VII - b Now





**[p. 71]**

I am very glad to hear that you have found employment as a surveyor. You will be able to operate with greater confidence and peace of mind.

One of these days I shall be starting on Mazzini. Whereas Mr Kinkel, whose wisdom, by his own admission, derives from nursery tales, now chooses to see nothing but unity among the 'great men', he finds on his return the battle raging optima forma.h For Ledru and Mazzini have bought the Brussels daily La Nation for 10,000 fr. drawn from the Italian loan. Mais voilà que' il Signore Mazzini looses off an opening article, in which he vents all his infamous anti-French, anti-socialist inanities about the initiative lost by France,d and this so wildly that Ledru now feels compelled—and has, it seems, made up his mind—to take issue with him personally. On the other hand, the socialists L. Blanc, Pierre

Leroux, Cabet, Mallarmet, etc., have joined forces and published a venomous retort composed by dear little L. Blanc. At the same time the majority of the French émigrés are violently incensed against Ledru, whom they rightly hold responsible for Mazzini's stupidities. Fire has broken out in the very midst of their camp.

Should you happen to get hold of Der Tag ist angebrochen, a book by that miserable cleric, Dulon, who fancies himself as a Lamennais, mind you give the cur a good dusting.

Dronke has been arrested in Paris where he lingered too long on his way here from Switzerland instead of hurrying through.

I like your selection very much. Pieper's article6 might do well enough for a newspaper. For a pamphlet it was dashed off too hastily and perfunctorily.

great anxiety. A crazy lad!

Cluss' protest11 was greeted with general applause at the League'

[^1]: Can you not get news of Edgarf from Braunfels? We have heard nothing from the lazybones and this is causing his motherg

[^2]: a for he's a good fellow - b for all it's worth - c But now - d See this volume, p. 59. - e W. Pieper, 'Die Arbeiter Assoziation in England'. - f Edgar von Westpha- len - 8 Caroline von Westphalen - h A. Cluss, 'An den Garanten-Congress des deutschen Anleihens in Cincinnati'. - • the Communist League



