---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "35. Engels to Marx. 1 April "
Page_Range: "108-109"
---

# 35. Engels to Marx. 1 April 



**[p. 35]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 1 April 1852

Dear Marx,

Got your letter this morning, actually intact. The new address seems to do some good.

The mirth-provoking émigré documents will be returned to you tomorrow. I shall extract some notes from them.

Little Dronke seems to have got himself properly caught in Paris, otherwise we should probably have heard from him. Do you suppose that some people belonging to 'the Marxian sect' really foregathered at the Café D.,a as the Kölnische Zeitung alleges?b I don't know where these remnants could have come from. In any case it would have been unpardonable of Dronke to have gone to the café and associated publiquement"1 with these people. But if he is still at liberty and there is any possibility of corresponding with him, we must certainly do everything we can now to bring him over to London—he is under an expulsion order and the fellows are quite capable of sending him to Algiers for rupture de ban.à So if we can find out more particulars, I shall see to it that I get hold of the £2, for we must certainly bring the little chap to safety. Write and tell me if you hear anything about him.

I am going home now to finish another article for Dana which, if it is ready, will go off to you by the second post. Last week I had a terrible cold and still have it, so that for several evenings I have been capable of absolutely nothing. Otherwise, more would have been done.

Tell Jones that he will be getting sorrfething from me next week,e—all my articles for him have, alas, been wretched, since the brevity of each and the negligible room available make me regularly forget what I wrote the week before—in addition, I have to write quickly and cursorily, and have no time whatever to collect and arrange material on the latest happenings in France. This constant improvisation becomes demoralising.

[^1]: a du Danemark. - b ' * Paris, 24. März' and ' Paris, 24. März', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 74, 26 March 1852. - c publicly - d violation of the ban - e 'Real Causes Why the French Proletarians Remained Comparatively Inactive in December Last', III.



