---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "36. Marx to Engels. 5 April "
Page_Range: "109-111"
---

# 36. Marx to Engels. 5 April 



**[p. 1848]**

Neue Rheinische Zeitung for April and March 1849,a for on this occasion the Frankfurtersb must be given a thorough lambasting. The Bauerc is not adequate for the purpose.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, ,. , r , Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first

36

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 5 April 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

The other day, just after you returned his first letter, Dronke wrote to Freiligrath from prison; I had forgotten to tell you. Freiligrath at once sent the letter to Lassalle for the latter to send some money to Paris for him, which could doubtless be done with all the more dispatch since Lassalle could use the letter to touch all the liberal bourgeois of Düsseldorf. Unfortunately, according to the Patrie, compromising letters were found on Dronke. Can he have been stupid enough to carry around testimonia of his fatuous Lyonnais' and other connections?

As I foresaw, Louis Blanc is trying to exploit the joint statement against Mazzini to create a new 'réseau d'action'{ and to thrust

[^1]: Enclosed a further consignment from Cluss105 which I must have back by Wednesday (the day of the Leagued meeting).

[^2]: a A reference to the material for Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, XIII - b former deputies to the Frankfurt National Assembly of 49 - c B. Bauer, Der Untergang des Frankfurter Parlaments. - d the Communist League - e Guillermain - f action network





**[p. 77]**

Dana has written at last and paid £9 according to the number of articles published.' As the presidential elections will for the present be taking up every column in the paper, he asks me at the same time to conden'se the remainder into 5-6 articles and, more especially, to discuss in the last one the PROSPECTS OF REVOLUTIONARY GERMANY, This will provide a splendid chance to castigate the émigrés and in a later letter I shall write to you at length about my views on the matter.

Szemere is sending me, in 3-4 batches, his (German) manuscript on 'Kossuth, Görgey and Louis Batthyâny'. Weydemeyer is to publish it in America,99 which means excellent business for him, the more so since he will, in addition, probably receive 500 dollars for his paperb from that quarter.

But before the thing goes off to America in German, it must be translated into English here so that, after it has appeared in German in America, it can be brought out as a pamphlet for readers over here. You will hardly have the time for this task, even if you neglect Dana for a while. In which case I shall have to give it to Jones. The payment for translation is £1 per sheet.

Here I have made the acquaintance of Colonel Szerelmey, who is a very cultivated man. In Hungary he took part in 17 battles. Since he is also a first-rate painter, he is now bringing out a magnificent work, with battle reports in the text, and battle illustrations. He himself did the sketches, which were finished off by leading French painters. He has promised me a copy. Each will cost £10. So you will receive an addition to your military library.

Your

K. M.

As you see, Kinkel has been a good deal more arbitrary than Louis Bonaparte. First he nominates the members of his chamber of deputies, the Guarantors' Congress.0 Next he takes fright at his

[^1]: a Engels' series of articles, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany. - b Die Revolution - c See this volume, p. 73.



