---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "42. Marx to Engels. 24 April "
Page_Range: "118-120"
---

# 42. Marx to Engels. 24 April 



**[p. 85]**

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to a letter from Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Cluss to Weydemeyer of 8 May Moscow, 1962 1852

Published in English for the first time

42

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 24 April 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

You cannot imagine what a wretched time I had last week. On the day of the funeral, the money I had been promised from various quarters failed to arrive, so that I was finally compelled to go to some French neighbours in order to pay the English vultures. And on top of this, alas, a letter arrived from Weydemeyer giving reason to suppose that in America, too, all our hopes have been dashed. Cluss, whose letter you will be getting next week, now holds out better prospects. Quoique de dure complexion^ I was, on this occasion, very hard hit by the wretched business.

Enclosed a letter from that cur Ewerbeck, who never uses a stamp and consistently robs one of one's last l Od. Then an article by B. Bauer from the Daily New-York Tribune,c to whose pages your articled has attracted all the rag-tag and bobtail. Bauer's

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - b Although by nature tough - c B. Bauer, 'The Present Impossibility of War', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3417, 31 March 1852. - d F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany.





**[p. 86]**

Mr Tellering is publishing a monthly or weekly in New York; the cur himself sent me the first issue—unadulterated third-form drivel.

Heise (of the Hornisse) is now an intimate of Willich's. They are as thick as thieves. What can he see in the fellow? Once again they are bragging about a proposed coup in Germany.

Dronke is a real imbécile. His appetite whetted by the £4 we got for him from the Rhineland, he went to Coblenz in the hopes of extorting some more. It never occurred to the jackass that he would be providing fresh ammunition for use against the people in Cologne.3 The fellow's behaviour is really too dis- graceful.

Apropos. Do not forget to send immédiatement two notes to London as follows: 1. for Liebknecht, empowering him to obtain the £1 from Hain. 2. Write a brief note yourself to Hain, telling your 'good friend' in a couple of lines that, having heard he was doing well, you had referred Liebknecht to him re the £ 1 . We must be careful not to make an enemy of him.

The fact is that one of our acquaintances, who has hither- to found shelter for the night at Liebknecht's lodgings, was thrown out by the latter's landlords, and not one of us has been able to raise a penny for the poor devil. Accordingly I yesterday sent Liebknecht a note in which I told him you had referred him to Hain re the £1. Mr Hain appeared somewhat in- credulous and told Liebknecht he must first see it in your hand- writing.

Let me have a few STAMPS, for I have a mass of stuff to send you.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: the Communist League members arrested and detained under investigation



