---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "43. Engels to Marx. 25 April "
Page_Range: "120-121"
---

# 43. Engels to Marx. 25 April 



**[p. 43]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 25 April 1852 Dear Marx,

Yesterday evening I received a note from Hain which I sent you together with my reply to it. After this, I think, Mr Hain will pay.

Herewith the STAMPS, more to follow shortly. Also returning the other stuff. Ewerbeck's letter is a worthy pendant to his book.3

'Pray help me oppose Ribbentrop! I shall denounce him to Democracy as a hypocrite and débaucheur.'b The man must be in his dotage.

Nor has friend Bruno increased in wisdom or divine knowl- edge.' Il valait bien la peined to set the American press in motion from Berlin thus, by this most roundabout route, proclaiming to an astonished world that the continental armies are there to maintain internal peace. Mr Bruno still represents the Hegelian dialectic in its deepest stagnation. At this stage of development, his concept of history goes no deeper than providing circumstantial proof of the most banal platitudes by an ample display of solemnity and pseudo-logical development, and then dishing them up as the brand-new findings of zealous research. All this is tolerable in the case of the distant past, but to be thus bamboozled about the immediate present is really too much and any fool should be able to see that there's nothing at all at the bottom of it. And as for the profound truth that governments are right vis-à- vis revolutions because the latter are still immature, but revolutions are also right vis-à-vis governments because they represent the ideas of the future, admittedly in embryonic and immature form, but nevertheless [] to a substantial degree—that is an old Hegelian joke whose novelty has certainly worn off even in America! And then the eternal 'ill-temper', 'peevishness', 'fundamental indifference' of the 'bourgeois'. 'In some countries, classes war against classes, in others nations against nations.' Strictly speaking, this prodigiously clever sentence is all that Bruno has learnt from the revolution.

Mr Teilering has apparently been chased out of France as being

[^1]: a H. Ewerbeck, L'Allemagne et les Allemands. - b Ewerbeck to Marx, 21 April 1852. - c See previous letter. - d It was well worth while



