---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "44. Engels to Marx. 27 April "
Page_Range: "121-123"
---

# 44. Engels to Marx. 27 April 



**[p. 88]**

Unless you know positively that Dronke went to Germany of his own free will, I would think it more probable that, having been already once expelled from France, he was this time transported not to any frontier but to the German frontier. But once safely in Nassau, why did the silly fool go to Coblenz when he'd have done far better to go to Hamburg, where no one knows him and he would have found Weerth and Strohn, hence also cash, and from there to England! But Coblenz being so close, he was obviously drawn there from Nassau by the prospect of money, and if he had managed to get through safely, would certainly have gone on to Cologne. At all events, it is fortunate for the Cologne people that they have already been dealt with by the Board of indicting magistrates, otherwise Dronke's arrest would have provided occasion for another six months' examination. But very soon they'll take him to Cologne and maybe attempt to produce him as a witness before the Court of Assizes. This time it serves him perfectly right. He could certainly have found such money as he needed in Frankfurt, or have got Lassalle to send it to him somewhere, but no, the little chap must needs go to Coblenz where he's known to every gendarme and every dog in town. En attendant il est sûrement logé.3

Your

F. E.

44

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 27 April 1852

Dear Marx,

Herewith Weydemeyer's latest, which sounds rather more hopeful. For the time being I am keeping your article114 here 1. so as to read it, and 2. so as to translate it into English at some later

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a Meanwhile he is out of harm's way.





**[p. 89]**

Voilà donc3 Moses Hess, in the Kölnische Zeitung, with a warrant out against him for high treason.b I'll be hanged if this hasn't happened because Father Dronke was found carrying those idiotic papers concerning their important business in Geneva. Cela valait bien la peine!c In the meantime Moses again becomes a martyr, which will greatly enhance his otium cum dignitate6; maybe he will shortly be dispatched to London—est-ce que nous n'échapperons jamais à cet imbécile? At any rate, all this can make things extremely awkward again for the poor devils in Cologne and provide new grounds for dragging out their trial; had they already been referred to the Court of Assizes, we should surely have heard about it.

Freiligrath has written asking for an introduction to my brother-in-law'—I am sending it to him today; evidently he is determined to look round for a post.

Warm greetings to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Splendid division on the Militia Bill last night.115 If the Almighty vouchsafes a few more like it, the new election will be postponed until September or October. SERVES THE WHIGS RIGHT AND THE FINAN- CIALS28 TOO! I see that Jones intends after all to bring out his PAPER straight away—it was a mean trick Harney played him over the Star, but it was lucky that Jones did not acquire that doomed, discredited, wretched old paper.116 Let Harney dig its grave and his own at the same time.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Here we have - h 'Amtliche Bekanntmachungen', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 99, 24 April 1852. - c It was well worth while! - d dignified leisure (Cicero, Oratio pro Sextio, 45) - e shall we never escape this imbecile? - f Emil Blank



