---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "48. Engels to Marx. 1 May "
Page_Range: "130-131"
---

# 48. Engels to Marx. 1 May 



**[p. 97]**

Philistine Lüning, so Dronke tells me, has been here with his spouse in order to unify Agitation and Emigration26—fruidessly, of course.

Farewell. Warmest regards to your wife from my wife and myself.

Your

K. M.

Hardly ever have I seen anything more stupid than Bruno Bauer's article on 'the decline of England'.3

How did the fellow manage to get in with Dana?

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English in full for the first time

48

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 1 May 1852

Dear Marx,

Enclosed a 30/- POST OFFICE ORDER, which is all I can spare for the moment. True, you will not be able to cash the thing tomorrow, on account of its being Sunday, but at least you know that you've got it. Should I find myself able to send off more of the same later on this month, you can be sure you'H get it come what may, but just now I cannot say.

It's very nice to hear that the little man b has turned up and is getting on well, and it is all to the good that he has, for the time being, found A FRIEND IN NEED, A FRIEND INDEED in Anschiitz. He must visit me some time this summer, once I have seen the back of my old man.

I have, oddly enough, long been turning over in my mind a similar

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: As to the question of the biographical sketches of the great men,c

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 85 and 87. - b Ernst Dronke - c See this volume, p. 93.



