---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "49. Engels to Marx. 4 May "
Page_Range: "131-133"
---

# 49. Engels to Marx. 4 May 



**[p. 98]**

Cluss' letter will be returned next week. I'll do the thing for Szerelmey.c By midday today the Americans had not yet arrived, maybe they are waiting for me now at home.

Your

F. E.

49

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 4 May 1852

Dear Marx,

Your fat American parcel has not yet arrived.d I have made inquiries at Pickford's, since the houses in my street have been renumbered, which gives rise to confusion. But at Pickford's there

[^1]: First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a which direction these barbs are coming from - b we shall see. £25 is well worth a bit of a row. - c See this volume, p. 93. - d See this volume, pp. 91 and 100.





**[p. 99]**

I shall be having a visit from my respected pater here this week, when the whole bloody matter of the firm will be settled and my position, too, will be further regulated. Either the contract will be renewed and the firm will continue as it is, which is not very probable, or I shall try so to arrange matters that my old man quits by the end of the year at the latest, and perhaps even by the end of June. Then there'll be the hellish liquidation which, however, should be more or less completed in 6 to 8 months, after which I shall turn my hand to something else, either go to Liverpool or God knows what. This will probably be decided within the next fortnight. I am glad that my old man will soon be here so that the inevitable mess is over as soon as possible and I know where I am,

I return Cluss' letter herewith. I have Jones' articles here, but not those of Harney, which you might send me some time so that I can acquaint myself with both sides and observe Father Harney in his new role. The industrious Jones will soon drive this indolent cur from the field if only he can hang on for a while. And he will certainly be able to raise the circulation3 to 4,000 a week, which alone means a profit (3,600 covers costs).

The arrival of my old man will, of course, put back my Dana plansb by a week or a fortnight. On the other hand you could meanwhile continue, through Szemere, to negotiate with the publisher over the sketches, to look through your correspondence and the JV. Rh. Z. (especially votes and speeches in the National Assembly) apropos the heroes to be depicted and, if the matter reaches a favourable conclusion, you could come up here for a week and we'd have a go at the thing.c I really think it could be done in such a way that no one will discover its paternité,0 and even if they did, little harm would be done.

According to a letter from Ebner, he is still negotiating over your Economy45 with Löwenthal, who wants to establish himself in Brussels and in the meantime remains a partner in the Frankfurt business.

[^1]: How is Freiligrath progressing with my brother-in-law?c Don't

[^2]: a of The People's Paper - b i.e. work on the series Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - d here: authorship - e Emil Blank (see this volume, p. 89).



