---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "50. Marx to Engels. 6 May "
Page_Range: "133-135"
---

# 50. Marx to Engels. 6 May 



**[p. 100]**

The copies of the Turn-Zeitung advised by Weydemeyer have still not arrived; there must have been some oversight on his part.

Write soon.

Your

F. E.

In the case of parcels which do not go by post, it would be best if, instead of the old No. 70, you include the old and new nos. In the address, thus:

No. 44/70, Great Ducie St., Strangeways, Manchester. Szerelmey's thingc tomorrow perhaps.

First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t n n e

50

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 6 May 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

The parcel didn't go off to you because Pickford's demanded 2/6d from my wife. And the whole lot put together isn't worth that much.

The funniest thing about it is that one of their heads of sections invariably carries these scraps to Hebeler, the Prussian Consul- General, who pays him for them. The Prussian government, of course, no less than Kinkel-Willich, possesses the key to these

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: The strange note enclosed herewith is a hastily made copy of a circular sent out by Messrs Kinkel and Willich to their affiliates.132

[^3]: a a tedious and rather muddle-headed creature - b the Communist League - c See this volume, p. 93.





**[p. 101]**

A coup quelconque3 is intended, so much is certain. General Klapka has already left for Malta, in his pocket a commission signed by Kossuth and Mazzini appointing him general command- ing the Italo-Hungarian army. I believe a start is to be made in Sicily. Unless these gentlemen suffer defeat and receive a drubbing twice a year, they feel ill at ease. That world history continues to unfold without their help, without their intervention, and without, indeed, official intervention, is something they refuse to admit. If things go wrong, as they are sure to do, Mr Mazzini will have a renewed opportunity for self-assertion in outraged letters to a Graham quelconque^133 Nor will his digestion suffer in consequence.

I am now correcting Bangya's translation of Szemere's character- sketches' written in Hungarian. While the original must be splendid, it has to be laboriously reconstructed from the wretched and often almost incomprehensible translation which is constantly at loggerheads with the rules of grammar and the consecutio temporum? This much is clear: the deposition of the Austrian dynasty which, at the time of its proclamation, was unpolitical and pernicious, was engineered by Mr Lajos Kossuth so as to secure for himself the post of governor, for he feared that, if he hesitated, he would later see it devolve unopposed on the victorious Görgey. Lajos was also responsible for the mistake of storming Ofen instead of marching on Vienna, since he was itching to celebrate with his family his triumphant entry into the capital.134

Apropos. I have just received a letter from Bangya. The publisher in Berlin has now made a definite offer: £25 for 5-6 sheets of character-sketches, 24 free copies. I shall receive the money from Bangya as soon as I deliver the manuscript to him. But the man wants it quickly.

My plan is as follows: for the time being I shall do a brouillon" with Dronke, which will plus ou moins1 obliterate my style. So it might be possible for you and me to get the thingg READY in a fortnight's time. At all events you must let me have some more

[^1]: a some coup or other - b some or other - c B. Szemere, Graf Ludwig Batthyâny,

[^2]: Arthur Görgei, Ludwig Kossuth. Politische Charakterskizzen aus dem Ungarischen Freiheitskriege. - d sequence of tenses - e rough draft - f more or less - 8 K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile.



