---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "51. Engels to Marx. 7 May "
Page_Range: "135-138"
---

# 51. Engels to Marx. 7 May 



**[p. 102]**

Enclosed letter from Cluss. Yesterday Freiligrath and I were with Trübner, the bookseller. He believes he can dispose of a number of copies of the Revolutionb here in London and place a further quantity in Germany through Campe. So as soon as Weydemeyer's copies arrive, forward them here. The Turn-Zeitung seems to have gone astray.

Your

K. Marx

First published much abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

51

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 May 1852

Dear Marx,

I return Cluss' letter herewith. In this connection it has occurred to me that now that Mr Dana is in touch with B. Bauer and Simon of Trier and is, at the same time, restricting your space on account of the presidential election, it would certainly not be out of place to give Mr Dana a taste of Yankee medicine. Cluss and a number of others should write to Mr Dana from various quarters inquiring why it is that these INCOMPARABLE articles should appear so rarely and irregularly and expressing the hope that the fault does not lie with the editorial board which, rather, might be expected to correct this situation and find it possible to publish articles by K. M. more frequently, etc., etc. Weydemeyer could very easily organise this; the only reason we need to give him is that Dana wants to restrict your soace and hence a demonstration of this

[^1]: a Willich's service in the Baden-Palatinate insurgent army in the spring of 1849. - b The issue of Die Revolution, in which Marx's Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte appeared.





**[p. 103]**

The circular sent out by the convention to the sections is exquisite. I'll be hanged if the St Petersburg, Warsaw, Berlin, Rome, etc., sections are situated more than 4 miles from Charing Cross. This carbonari-like, self-important, bustling, order-of-the- dayish attitude again betrays how mistaken these gentlemen are as to their ostensibly organised forces. To propose a coup just now is a bêtiseb and a dirty trick. But truly, 'something has got to happen, something has got to be done'. It would be desirable for the supposed leaders of the thing to be all of them captured and shot; but needless to say the great men will make sure this doesn't happen and the heroic Willich will stay quietly in London so long as there is still money in the cashbox, credit at Schärttner's and free coats and boots ad libitum at the 'tailor's and shoemaker's'. That is what Mr Willich means by supplies for the army!

As for the matter of the character-sketches,0 so far so good. The thing can be ready in a month's time. But mind you find someone reliable to make a fair copy, so that it goes out in a completely unknown hand. When you come up, bring the Americana, the complete run of the JV. Rh. Z. and the necessary manuscript documents. My old man arrives tomorrow and is unlikely to be able to stay here for longer than 8-10 days.

I've at last received my stuff on military science from Germany. So far I have been able to read only little of it. At this stage, I should say that Mr Gustav von Hoffstetter, of wide renown, is not exactly a Napoleon but rather a thoroughly reliable commander of a battalion or so in a minor engagement. But I haven't yet finished reading his thing/1 Not unpleasing, on the other hand, is a booklet on new fortifications in general by Küntzel, a Prussian captain of engineerse—both better history and more materialist than any- thing I have so far read in militaribus.1

Now as for Mr Willisen, be it said here that the victory at Idstedt135 was won, not by the Danes over the Schleswig- Holsteiners, but rather by the usual tactics of common sense over

[^1]: a A Barnum, Bamum et demi (Against one Barnum one and a half) is modelled on such an expression as 'à Corsaire Corsaire et demi', the idea of which is roughly 'to beat someone at his own game'. - b piece of stupidity - c K. Marx and F. Engels,

[^2]: The Great Men of the Exile. - d Gustav von Hoffstetter, Tagebuch aus Italien, 1849. - e H. Küntzel, Die taktischen Elemente der neuen Fortificationen. - f in the military sphere





**[p. 104]**

I see that Görgey's memoirs have just come outr—but since they cost 6 talers, I doubt that I can buy them just now. With these, the material on the military aspect of the Hungarian war may be regarded as complete for the time being. At any rate, I shall do something on the Hungarian war, and possibly on all the wars of 1848/49. ' 6 As soon as I am clear in my mind about earlier military history, I shall look round for a publisher onto whom I can then shift most of the expenditure on sources.

You will have received the 30/- sent you last Saturday.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published much abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: a W. Willisen, Theorie des großen Krieges angewendet auf den russisch-polnischen Feldzug von 1831. - b insights - c A. Görgei, Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 1849.



