---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "52. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 7 and about 15 May "
Page_Range: "138-141"
---

# 52. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 7 and about 15 May 



**[p. 52]**

MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS137

IN WASHINGTON

[London, 7 and about 15 May 1852]

 Herewith you will find a wrapper, in which the contemptible, craven, half-crazed Teilering mailed his defamatory opus. (Ad- dress:) CHARLES MARX, THE FUTURE DICTATOR OF GERMANY.1 8 Now I ask you, what is to be done with the cur? To start a public row with a lunatic of this sort would be doing him too much honour and is the whole object of his manoeuvre. Could you not send the MANIACS wrapper to the New York postal service in my name? Or might not a sound thrashing be the simplest course? I leave the whole thing to you. Naturally any packages of the kind will in future be returned. But by indulging in this sort of gutter-snipe's trick, the cur also brings me to the notice of the English police, which, under the Tories, is far from pleasant

Ad vocem* Szemere: I am not by nature inclined to be unduly trusting, least of all when it comes to the official great men of 1848/49. But in Szemere's case, it's quite a different matter. I am correcting the German translation—for he originally wrote in Hungarian—of his 'character-sketches'.11 Every line betrays a superior intellect, and the rage of the democrats may be attributed to the CONTEMPT AND MOCKERY-SYSTEM which he employs with supreme skill. Although, of course, in accordance with the Hungarian line, he places, as in Antiquity, 'the fatherland and the citizen' above all else, his writing is imbued with a fundamentally critical spirit. A man who thinks and writes in this way is no Austrian agent. As for the 'DEAR COLONEL WEBB', he was negotiating with him without knowing who he was, but broke off as soon as he was informed what was afoot. The story of his fortune is very simple. Szemere himself does not possess a centime. But his wife is the daughter of a (now deceased) Austrian 'Hof-agent' (as the Austrian Procureurs du roic are called in Hungary); her old man possessed a fortune of a million. Throughout the 1848/49 revolution Mrs Szemere lived in Vienna with her mother. He had even ordered her to refrain from writing to him and to sever all ties with him until the old

[^1]: a As to - b B. Szemere, Graf Ludwig Batthyâny, Arthur Görgei, Ludwig Kossuth.

[^2]: Politische Charakterskizzen aus dem Ungarischen Freiheitskriege. - c King's prosecutors



The Austrian spies are in Kossuth's immediate entourage, notably Madame Pulszky. This Count Pulszky is a Galician Jew by origin. Madame Pulszky, daughter of an ultra-reactionary Jewish banker in Vienna, writes to her mater each week, and from this source the Austrian government finds out anything it wants. It may even be asked whether Count and Countess Pulszky (The Times regularly derided both these individuals for the ASSUMPTION of their title)a have not promised to lure Mr Kossuth into the snare in the hope that they may thereby retrieve their confiscated land. It is known for a fact that as a student, Pulszky denounced his comrades' demagogic activities 139 to the Austrian government

Enclosed you will find General Klapka's declaration of princi- ples,140 from which you will see that he, too, is starting to rebel against Kossuth. The last part of the document means nothing more than that Klapka is going to participate in Mazzini's projected coup. I have, if I am not mistaken, already written to you about the plans for a coup hatched by Messrs Mazzini, Kossuth, etc. Nothing could be more welcome to the great powers, especially Bonaparte, and nothing more damaging to ourselves.

I have just received a letter from Cologne, dated 3 May.b They are asking for 200 or 250 copies of the Brumaire. So pray ask Weydemeyer to send me forthwith 300 copies via Engels. At the same time, he should advise me of the selling price. I take it that he has already dispatched the 50 copies as promised141

[^1]: a The Times, No. 20955, 10 November 1851, leader. - b Bermbach's letter to Marx of 3 May 1852; the original has 11 May.





**[p. 107]**

Jones' STAMPED PAPER has come out and the first number has sold surprisingly well. I enclose a cutting from the Notes" from which you will see that he has knocked Harney out completely. Mr Harney is proceeding down the primrose path. One article in his paper, signed Spartacus,b attacks Chartism for being only a CLASS MOVEMENT which ought to be replaced by A GENERAL AND NATIONAL MOVEMENT, genuine Mazzinian hot air, etc., etc., etc

Extracts from the Cologne letter0:

'Recently Mrs Daniels was favoured yet again with a domiciliary visit in the certain expectation that it would yield a letter from you. The Prussian police seem to be as putty in the hands of the first jackass to come along. The prisoners' case seems to be approaching its conclusion. The examination has been concluded and, for over two months, the files have been back in the possession of the local public prosecutor at the Court of Appeal where, however, they seem incapable of deciding upon the wording of a petition to the Board of indicting magistrates. It is generally rumoured that the thing will be dealt with before a special Court of Assizes in June.*

Apropos. Ask Weydemeyer if he has yet been to see Dana, who is waiting for him to pass on the information I sent him about the situation of the Cologne prisoners and the conduct of the Prussian government, before writing a LEADER on the subject.d He mustn't for God's sake fail to.do this, if it can possibly be helped.

If you manage to bring out Freiligrath's poem against Kinkel et Comp e as a broadsheet, you will have an assured sale of 500 copies in the Rhineland alone. But the thing must be done quickly. Otherwise it will be trop tard}

Do not allow the articles, etc., in your possession to age so much that they lose their bouquet. If you can't get them printed (Eccarius, Engels, etc.),142 give them to some paper or other, e.g. the Turn-Zeitung, as you think fit. In any case, it is better they should be read than left unread.

If you can't get Freiligrath's poem printed, give it to whatever

[^1]: a [E. Jones,] 'Current Notes', The People's Paper, No. 1, 8 May 1852. - b Spartacus [pseudonym of W. J. Linton], 'The Sense of the Country', The Star of Freedom, No. 1, 8 May 1852. - c Below is an extract from Bermbach's letter to Marx of 3 May 1852. - d New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3446 of 4 May 1852 used this material for its leader 'Justice of Prussia'. See also this volume, p. 115. - e F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer', I and II. - f too late



