---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "57. Marx to Engels. 22 May "
Page_Range: "145-146"
---

# 57. Marx to Engels. 22 May 



**[p. 112]**

beau.*

I hope to receive a letter from you by tomorrow morning at the latest.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

57

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London] 22 May [1852] 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

The first half of the 10-pound note arrived this morning. I intend to leave here on Friday,b this time by ship to Liverpool and thence to Manchester.

Apropos. Citizen Schramm0 is travelling to America via Liver- pool. Well, the fellow proposes, or so he confides to us, to descend upon you on Wednesday or Thursday. You must see if you can give him the slip.

Willich has had a rather nice adventure. Mrs von Brüningk, who provided him with free board, used to enjoy flirting with this old he-goat, as with the other ex-lieutenants. One day the blood rushes to the head of our ascetic, he makes a brutally brutish assault upon madame, and is ejected from the house with éclat. No more love! No more free board! Nous ne voulons plus de jouisseurs."*

Cherval, about whose heroism before the Paris Assizes in the matter of the Complot allemand-français*14S you will have heard, has, as you may also have seen in the English papers (Morning

[^1]: a It will be a fine how-do-you-do. - b 28 May - c Conrad Schramm - d We want no more sybarites. - e Franco-German plot



