---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "59. Marx and Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 28 May "
Page_Range: "147-149"
---

# 59. Marx and Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer. 28 May 



**[p. 114]**

Awaiting further details.146

Your

F. E.

The story about Willich is most entertaining. So fate has caught up with that pure and noble man after all!

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Printed according to the original 1929

Published in English for the first time

59

MARX AND ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

Manchester, 28 May 1852

Dear Weiwei,

I am staying with Engels for a few days and have found your letter here. Today you must be content with a few lines.

The main purpose of this letter is to inform you about three individuals who will be arriving in America:

1. Heise (of the Kassel Hornisse), Willich's agent (who, unbe- known to Kinkel with whom he is on bad terms, is seeking to spread Willich's renown). Apropos. Mr Willich was among the

cavalière servanteh of Baroness von Brüningk who, once a week, provided him, Techow, Schimmelpfennig, etc., with free board. The Brüningk woman is a flirtatious little woman and it amuses her to tease the old he-goat, who plays the ascetic. One day he made a direct carnal attaque upon her and was ignominiously shown the door. Keep an eye on Heise and don't trust him out of your sight.

[^1]: a whatever you do, you must be here by Friday, at four o'clock in the afternoon - b knights in attendance





**[p. 115]**

3. Conrad Schramm. He has in his hands a credential from us, so worded that without you he cannot take a step. In his relations with his brother2 and the latter's other friends, his conduct has not always been beyond reproach. The confidence you accord him should not be unconditional but rather tempered with caution. In the adverse circumstances here he has, furthermore, gone very much downhill, is quite unreliable and not over-scrupulous in money- matters, tends to swagger and boast like a commis voyageurb and hence may well compromise those in his surroundings. On the other hand he has a number of good qualities. I feel it my duty to put you au fait in advance. You should also pass on this information to Cluss.

As to Lupus' letter, you should not take it too literally. Wolff wrote in a moment of agitation and is very well aware of the many obstacles that stood in your way.c

Don't forget to send me in your next a detailed report on 'Willich's Corps'147 in New York.

My warm regards to your wife. I hope that, 'for all that',d your affairs will yet progress.

Dana has written to say he wants to do an essay on the Cologne people" as soon as you provide him with the necessary informa- tion. So go and see him. The Cologne people are to appear before a special Court of Assizes in June. Daniels is said to have consumption and Becker' to be half blind. Mind you settle the matter quickly with Dana and send me the article. It will provide consolation for Mrs Daniels.

Your

K. Marx

Dear Weydemeyer,

As regards Heise, I first met him in the Palatinate. A democratic loafer who lends a willing ear to bad jokes about Tom, Dick or Harry, but a no less willing hand to Tom, Dick or Harry's pompous, democratic schemes for world conquest and world

[^1]: a Rudolf Schramm - b commercial traveller - c Wilhelm Wolff's letter to Weydemeyer of 16 April 1852. - d An allusion to F. Freiligrath's verse 'Trotz alledem!' published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on 6 June 1848. - e Reference to the leading article 'Justice of Prussia', based on the material sent in by Marx and published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3446, 4 May 1852. - £ Hermann Heinrich Becker



