---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "60. Marx to Jenny Marx. 11 June "
Page_Range: "149-151"
---

# 60. Marx to Jenny Marx. 11 June 



**[p. 116]**

Your

F. E.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , , . , , . ,. , r , r. Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

60

MARX TO JENNY MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 June 1852 70 Great Ducie Street

Dear Heart,

I was very pleased to get your letter. By the way, you must never have any qualms about telling me all. If you, my poor little wretch, have to endure bitter reality, it is only fair that I should share that torment, at least in my thoughts. In any case, I know how unendingly resilient you are and how the slightest encourage- ment is enough to revive your spirits. I hope that the other £5 will reach you this week or on Monday at the latest.

I did of course pack the Schnellpost. But I haven't got the back numbers in which Ruge deposited the better part of his ordure. The process of curing these stock-fisha makes us laugh till we cry.

Though Oswald's package won't yield very much, something may be made of it. Our dear A. Ruge is incapable of writing 3 lines without compromising himself. 'Moute'b has already been corrected by me, unless I am mistaken.

The printer in the City seems to be a lesser lumenc who, not having a superfluity of underlings, will certainly require an

[^1]: a Marx refers here to his and Engels' work on The Great Men of the Exile. - b The misprint which cropped in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, VII published in Die Revolution, should read: Toute. - c luminary





**[p. 117]**

Harro's pamphlet" is truly touching in the naivety of its stupidity! Be so kind as to cut Engels' article on Heinzen out of the Briisseler-Zeitungh and send it to us,— and that very soon. If the Kosmos doesn't arrive, no matter. We have a letter of mine up here which contains the gist of the thing.148

Love and kisses to my manikins.

Your

K. M.

Engels has further pointed out that whereas, tfiroughout the pamphlet, I always deliberately write 'Louis Bonaparte', Mr Weydemeyer has entitled it 'Louis Napoleon'.149

P.S. Dear Jenny, be so kind as to tell Eccarius that he should write a short postscript to his 'Mechanics' Strike',44 since Weydemeyer is 'considering' publishing it. We should agree to this, if only on Cluss' account.

Dear Heart, send Jones the 2 enclosed pieces, 'Chevalier Hiilsemann's Farewell' and 'John Barney and the French Minister0', together with the short cutting about 'Cayenne'—preferably by post, unless he comes to see you.150 I beg you not to bother Mr Pieper with such errands. To him, everything provides occasion for rodomontade and I don't want Jones—who, by the way, was responsible for making him so uppish—to regard him as my alter ego. Since Pieper believes the letters are written for 'the party', he must not henceforward set eyes on any more of them.

Prego il Signor Colonello Musch di gradire le mie migliori e più cordiali felicitazioni.d

F. Engels

[^1]: [From Engels]

[^2]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Printed according to the original 1929

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Harro Harring, Historisches Fragment über die Entstehung der Arbeiter-Vereine und ihren Verfall in Communistische Speculationen. - b F. Engels, 'The Communists and Karl Heinzen' (published in Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung). - c Etienne Gilbert Sar- tiges - d Will Colonel Musch please accept my best and most cordial felicitations.



