---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "65. Engels to Marx. 6 July "
Page_Range: "160-162"
---

# 65. Engels to Marx. 6 July 



**[p. 127]**

Vi sono genti fottenti, e fottute; E di potte e di cazzi notomie. E nei culi molt' anime perdute, etc.a

First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

65

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 July 1852 Dear Marx,

It's a good thing that the manuscriptb has gone off. I hope that copies will arrive in 3-4 weeks' time. You must have been really in the soup if, as antidote, you had to take Pietro Aretino's porcherie.''

I am up to my eyes in work here. I still have eleven business letters to write today and it is nearly 7 o'clock. However, I will do an article for Dana,e if possible today and if not, by tomorrow evening at the latest.

[^1]: Cazzo di Dio, queste sono forti.d

[^2]: a O twice magnificent Ser Agnello, Dispel for me the doubts, I pray, You who of all the why and wherefore Which in the brothel raised strife know, today. Whose mighty mind can grasp

[^3]: the fate Some folks seduce and others Of Bartolo's and Baldo's earthly frame are seduced And whose keen fancy apprehends But one and all by lust are ruled. the laws How many souls through arses Of heavenly bodies and their course! go astray

[^4]: - b K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - c obscenity - d God's prick, this is strong meat. - e Probably article XV from Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany.





**[p. 128]**

Judging by the facts, the Paris plot1M would seem more likely to have emanated from our carrément and crânement6 sinister Barthélémy, etc.— the daring artillery preparation is something qui sent son Willich de vingt lieues.e It is more than likely that Ruge, etc., also had a finger in the pie, but those cannons fashioned out of gas pipes and draped with tarpaulins are of Hohenzollern origin.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: At all events, I shall write about the Hungarian war.1S6

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'The Kölnische Zeitung on the Magyar Struggle', 'The War in Italy and Hungary', 'Hungary' and also reviews of military operations in Hungary published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung from February to May 1849. - b A. Görgei, Mein Leben und Wirken in Ungarn in den Jahren 1848 und 1849. - c mean - d fairly and squarely - e which smells of Willich 20 leagues away



