---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "66. Marx to Engels. 13 July "
Page_Range: "162-164"
---

# 66. Marx to Engels. 13 July 



**[p. 129]**

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

66

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 July 1852 Dear Engels,

There being no letter from you, I conclude that the worthy Weydemeyer must, for all that/ be still persevering with his 'system'. The thing's becoming really incomprehensible and, quite aside from the pecuniary loss, which is just now very perceptible, is turning me for good measure into the laughing stock of the émigré vermin and of the booksellers whom I had approached about this unfortunate affair.

I have not written an article on the elections because I feel it would be better to await the full results.159 From what I have seen so far, it seems to me that, apart from 5-6 more votes for the Whigs, the old Parliament will rise again unchanged. The fellows are in a cercle vicieuxd from which they cannot break out. The only ones to have suffered any significant losses so far are the Peelites.73 Meanwhile, in an apologia for Graham, The Morning Chronicle declares that only one alternative remains, that Whigs are as incompetent as Tories, and that the only capable people, apart from Graham and his supporters, are Cobden, Bright and Co. And these should govern together. Curiously enough, the following day—as you may perhaps have seen,— The Times carried an article which likewise contained an apologia for Graham.''

[^1]: a why not? - b why shouldn't the nephew have his Bourbon shot too? - c from Freiligrath's 'Trotz alledem!' - d vicious circle - e The Times, No. 21164, 10 July 1852, leader.





**[p. 130]**

Bangya is now on very close terms with the Orleanist intriguer, 'de Rémusat'. Some Hungarian quelconque' warned him against the man who is said to have 'betrayed' the Germans during the complot allemand-français.143 Rémusat has agents right in the Paris Prefec- ture. So, sans mot dire à M. Bangya'' he writes asking for a report on this gentleman. The reply, which was communicated to me, stated that Bangya was in no way suspect, that he had got out in time, otherwise he too would have been arrested. The traitor was

'un certain Cherval, nommé Frank, mais dont le véritable nom est Cramer.'"

From the outset this Cherval is said to have been hand in glove with the police. What is more, Rémusat is receiving original letters written by Cherval to the Prussian Embassy, stating that, in accordance with promises made to him in the Mazas,16 and now that he had professed the 'principe' of ordre, it was 'leur devoir'1 to provide him with the necessary 'moyens'.* The Prussian Embassy, however, declared that since he was being paid as a spy by the French, and double emploih was out of the question, he could have no claims on the Prussians. He was therefore sent to London to observe the German refugees and, in addition, to 'keep an eye on Claremont'.161 In the latter capacity he called on Rémusat and offered him his services as an agent. Rémusat, on instructions from Paris, pretended to agree and assigned to him a go-between in the person of a valet at Claremont; this man was now entrusted with the task of misinforming the Paris police through Cherval.

So well organised is the Orleanist agitation that the fellows possess what amounts to a regular clandestine postal service by which one can send letters, parcels, and pamphlets to France as safely as innocuous matter by ordinary mail.

My main concern in all this was to procure an original letter of Cherval's relating to his connections with the Prussian Embassy.

[^1]: a The original has Weltumwiihler by analogy with Wühler (agitators), the name the bourgeois constitutionalists in Germany in 1848-49 applied to republican demo- crats. - h safe - r or other - <* without a word to Mr Bangya - e a certain Cherval, known as Frank, but whose real name is Cramer - ' principle of order, it was their duty - s means - h double employ



