---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "69. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 20 July "
Page_Range: "168-170"
---

# 69. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 20 July 



**[p. 135]**

So much for Bermbach.

Vis-à-vis Schimmelpfennig, Willich has retracted his statement about the B[rüningk] woman. Schimmelpfennig has now put it about that he was seeking to destroy Mrs Brüningk's virtue by magnetising her. The vertueux3 Willich.

A certain Cœurderoy (d'ailleurs très bon républicain).h who has already published a little pamphlet against Mazzini, Ledru, L. Blanc, Cabet, etc.,1 is about to bring out what amounts to a book on the entire French emigration.d

Proudhon is publishing a new work.6 Religion, the State, etc., having become impossible, only 'individuals' remain, a discovery he has lifted from Stirner.f

That jackass W[eydemeyer]'s impardonable procrastination has put me in such straits that today I can't even afford a STAMP for this letter.

Your

K. M.

First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 """" time

69

[London, 20 July 1852]

 With a difference of at most 10 votes in favour of either Whigs or Tories, the elections here will produce the same old Parliament. The cercle vicieux* is complete. The same old

[^1]: MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS165

[^2]: IN WASHINGTON

[^3]: a virtuous - b in other respects a very good republican (an allusion to cœur du roi—king's heart) - c E. Cœurderoy, O. Vauthier, La Barrière du Combat qui vient de se livrer entre les citoyens Mazzini, Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc, Etienne Cabet, Pierre Leroux, Martin Nadaud, Mallarmet, A. Bianchi (de Lille) et autres hercules du nord. - d E. Cœurderoy, De la révolution dans l'homme et dans la société. - e P. J. Proudhon, La révolution sociale démontrée par le coup d'état du 2 décembre. - f An allusion to M. Stirner's Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum. - s vicious circle





**[p. 136]**

There is little new to report about émigré affairs. But for a few louts, Willich stands more and more isolated, no one believing in his probity any longer. As I have told you, Reichenbach, though he resigned from the committee long ago, refuses to hand out a penny from the loan until a definitive committee has been formed. In his eyes, Willich and Kinkel are as unacceptable as the handful of blackguards who elected them. Reichenbach est un honnête

bourgeois, qui prend sa responsabilité au sérieux?

The French emigration has split into 3 camps: 1. Revolution (Ledru). 2. Delegation (the more progressive). 3. 1,500 opponents of both, the plebs or, as the aristocrats used to call them, the 'populeart. A certain Cceurderoy {d'ailleurs très bon républicain)^ has published a pamphlet against Mazzini-Ledru and Cabet-Blanc and is shortly to bring out something else. You will receive both when they appear.

[^1]: Yesterday a letter from Cologne, from which the following1:

[^2]: 'Latterly they have been visiting various places in an attempt to find correspondence from you which, they are convinced, was to be conveyed through the agency of these persons to democrats in the Rhineland. Your friends are at last to be brought before the Court of Assizes. The bill of indictment, a most compendious work, has been drawn up, the date for the public hearing has been fixed for the 28th of this month, and the usual preliminaries are under way. As I

[^3]: a is an honest bourgeois who takes his responsibility seriously - b in other respects a very good republican (an allusion to cœur Au roi—king's heart) - c Marx quotes here Bermbach's letter of 9 July 1852 (see also this volume, pp. 134-35).



