---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "70. Engels to Marx. 22 July "
Page_Range: "170-171"
---

# 70. Engels to Marx. 22 July 



**[p. 137]**

'P.S. I have just read the bill of indictment which contains no less than 65-70 pages. If they're convicted, these people have only their own statements to blame. I doubt there can be any more consummate jackasses than these working men: Reiff made statements that were almost regular denunciations, and various others behaved no less ineptly. Small wonder that the fellows were so much harassed; the longer they have been held in solitary confinement, the more satisfactory statements they made. That aside, facts don't come into it.'

Voilà our Straubingers,61 it's tough that world history should have to be made with people such as these

70

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 22 July 1852

Dear Marx,

Enclosed the article for Dana.b The information sent by Bermbach is not pleasant; if only those who have not chattered manage to get off! The trial, by the way, is directed autant" against us as against the Cologne people; we too shall have some rough

[^1]: First published in part in Russian in Printed according to a letter from Voprosy istorii KPSS, No. 3, Moscow, 1962 Cluss to Weydemeyer of 6 August and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, 1852 Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a for refusal to obey the summons. - b F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, XVI. - c as much



