---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "71. Marx to Gottfried Kinkel. 22 July "
Page_Range: "171-172"
---

# 71. Marx to Gottfried Kinkel. 22 July 



**[p. 138]**

Could you perhaps get hold of Cceurderoy's things for me? I.e. if they're worth the trouble, and contain anything more than mere rhetoric.

Our Worcell, as I learn from Smitt,b really was a count and a protagonist of the Volhynian insurrection; he distinguished himself by being cut off and leading a kind of robber band in the woods for some 3-4 weeks, until taken off to Poland by Rozzycki; our Sznayde commanded some cavalry—from what I know so far—without distinction. A work by Mieroslawski on the Polish campaign, which came out in Berlin in 1847,c is very highly spoken of by Smitt.d This Mieroslawski is certainly the most eminent among Poles and is likely to make a name for himself.

Mind you don't forget the English article!e

I am expecting Drunkel' this evening, together with a bag of books. I am particularly in need of the N. Rh. Z. just now and hope he is bringing it.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

71

[London,] 22 July 1852 5 Sutton Street, Soho Office of The People's Paper To Dr J. G. Kinkel

You are alleged, or so I am informed, to have ventured the following statement before Anneke or others at Cincinnati: 'Marx and Engels'

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO GOTTFRIED KINKEL166

[^3]: IN LONDON [Rough copy]

[^4]: a the young - b F. Smitt, Geschichte des polnischen Aufstandes und Krieges in den Jahren 1830 und 1831. - c L. Mieroslawski, Kritische Darstellung des Feldzuges vom Jahre 1831. - d F. Smitt, op. cit., Dritter Theil, S. XI-XII. - e See this volume, p. 145. - f Ernst Dronke



