---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "72. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 30 July "
Page_Range: "172-177"
---

# 72. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 30 July 



**[p. 139]**

Dr K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Printed according to the original 1929

Published in English for the first time

72

MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS167

IN WASHINGTON

[London, 30 July 1852]

 Huzel's letter 168 was greeted with Homeric laughter. It gave rise to the following intermezzos:

5 Sutton Str., Soho Office of The People's Paper

'You are alleged, or so I am informed, to have ventured the following statement before Anneke or other Germans at Cincin- nati: "Marx and Engels etc." (there follows the treasonable passage). I await your answer by return of post. Silence will be regarded as an admission.

This note was kept deliberately vague: 'alleged Anneke or other Germans', etc. in order to leave Mr Kinkel plenty of latitude for ambiguities. The following reply arrived by return:

[^1]: 'To Dr Johann Gottfried Kinkellfi9

[^2]: Dr Karl Marx'3

[^3]: 1 Henstridge Villas, St. John's Wood, 24th July 1852

[^4]: To Dr Karl Marx

[^5]: Since the article about me was published under your auspices " ° during my imprisonment, I have wanted to have nothing more to do with you. If you believe that you can, through the testimony of Anneke or other honourable men, rather

[^6]: a See also this volume, p. 149.





**[p. 140]**

Gottfried Kinkel

I have not succeeded in making the final stroke of the pen" as in the original. N'est-ce pash very cunning? I am to have recourse to an English court on account of insults offered at Cincinnati. And how coolly everything is rejected that might smack of a duel and the like.

Since I could only assume that the worthy Gottfried Kinkel, who drops the Johann when in public, would refuse to accept further letters bearing a Soho postmark, I hit upon the following ruse. I asked Ernest Jones to write the address and Lupus to post the letter itself in Windsor, where he had business. Inside the envelope, Gottfried found a second little billet-doux, its margin adorned with a posy of forget-me-nots and roses printed in colour and with the following content:

24th July 1852 5 Sutton Str., Soho Office of The People's Paper 'To Dr Johann etc. Kinkel

'In juxtaposition with a written statement, now before me, by your guarantor Huzel, whom at Cincinnati you cravenly required to give his word of honour to keep silent about your mendacious gossip there, a promise which, however, was given only conditionally by Huzel;

'with a letter, likewise before me, written at some time by Dr Gottfried Kinkel in his own hand to his ex-guarantor Cluss,171 in which the same Kinkel boasts of his intention to enter into political relations with me:

'your letter—and this is precisely why it was provoked—provides a new and striking proof that the said Kinkel is a cleric whose baseness is only equalled by his cowardice.

[^1]: Dr Karl Marx'172

[^2]: a An imitation of the flourishes in Kinkel's signature. - b Is it not





**[p. 141]**

Now for greater matters.— Mazzini, no less, has for the past few days been dashing round like mad in an attempt to bring about an agreement between all those who officially make up the bourgeois emigration here. Also betook himself to Johann etc. And with the following result: Mazzini, Kossuth, Ledru-Rollin and Kinkel constitute Europe's Executive. Each member of this authority has the right to co-opt 2 subjects of his nationality. However, the decision as to these co-options rests with the majority among the four originals, i.e. Mazzini. Accordingly, co-opted among the Germans are A. Ruge and A. Goegg. Who among the other nationalities, I don't yet know. Kinkel, for his part, is said to have laid down 2 conditions: 1. a demand of 20,000 dollars for his loan. This I hold to be a fabrication. 2. The continued and independent existence of the Kinkel-Willich, etc. finance committee. This is no more than formal deference to Willich, for in fact it has already been decided to transfer the entire loan fund to A. Goegg. Finally, Kinkel & Co. will most humbly recognise the Revolutionary League in America.m This is the latest turn of events. How far they have progressed towards concluding this important treaty or whether they are still lingering over the preliminaries I do not know. In any case the thing must be noised abroad in America, with particular emphasis on the following. At the last guarantors' meeting in London, in May 1852, when the Kinkel-Willich committee was definitively elected, Kinkel most solemnly declared on his word of honour that if A. Ruge were elected to the committee, he himself would walk out, for he would never serve on the same committee as a man who had publicly described him as an agent of the Prince of Prussia.3

Secondly: What will Weitling & Co. say, if the dollars raised in America by Kinkel are expended by the Finance Minister, A. Goegg? For this is what is intended, in order to subsidise 'K. Heinzen's' Janus and to put into circulation the immortal articles of Ruge, Heinzen, etc.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 96 and 150-51.





**[p. 142]**

A few days ago Lupus met an Italian member of Mazzini's committee and taxed him with most of these absurdities. What of it? retorts the Roman, more than 600 people are killed in a battle. However, since the Italians fear that in this way they will BY AND BY be caught, shot or locked up, and since this or that victim of his exhortations is sending relatives to London, our man of action is afraid that some misunderstanding may lead to his being stabbed by a deluded and frenzied fellow-countryman; so every night he changes his lodgings on the pretext of having to hide from the Austrians. Yet it is not Austrians but 'deluded' Italians from whom he abjectly slinks into hiding. Surely this antipope deserves the gallows? To harass, tease, wear down a nation in this way! The inevitable result, particularly in the case of a people like the Italians, is a state of appalling, passive dejection, of complete and utter collapse.

Our people were to have appeared before the JURY in Cologne yesterday, but suddenly came the announcement of a further adjournment because one of the witnesses for the prosecution, Schulz, a police official in Berlin, had fallen ill. So if Mr Schulz were to die, the defendants might well remain under preliminary investigation until doomsday. In the meantime Becker is going blind and Daniels is getting consumption. C'est par trop infâme.d In all this, the bourgeois press is playing a most abominable role.

I saw the notice of adjournment in the Kölnische Zeitung' A few days earlier I had received the following report from Cologne/

[^1]: a after the event - b commonplaces - ' Italy will manage on her own! - d It's too iniquitous. - e [Report from Cologne* of 26 July,] Kölnische Zeitung, No. 183, 27 July 1852. - f Below is a passage from Bermbach's letter to Marx of mid-July 1852.





**[p. 143]**

'The only statements of any note are those of the witnesses Haupt, who gave a fairly detailed and comprehensive story, and Hentze, an ex-lieutenant, who to some extent attacked Becker. On Saturday Erhardt, a cashier with Stein, the banker, was arrested on the same charge. He is said to be slightly compromised by reason of the recommendation he gave to Nothjung and of a few letters discovered on the latter which seemed to indicate some understanding between the two By the way, so nicely have the jurymen been selected that, if you consider the odds, the State could not be better placed.'

The most important news politically is the treaty concluded between Prussia, Austria and Russia during the Czar'sb visit to Vienna.177 It was first announced in The Morning Chronicle the day before yesterday. Yesterday there was a reprint of it in The Times,c

so you will be able to read it for yourself. Here the election results are such that the Tories, who will drop the Corn Law question, possess a large counter-revolutionary majority on all other issues and this Cabinet will, I believe, give way before nothing short of a more or less revolutionary manifestation. The bourgeois now realise what a blunder they made in failing to draw the political conclusions from their anti-Corn Law victory in 1846. Ils y

penseront.d My list of printing errors for the Brumaire will soon

[^1]: a Here 'F.d.B.' in German means 'für die Bücher'. Below it is taken to mean 'für den Bund'. - b Nicholas I. - c 'Secret Treaty of the Three Northern Powers' (from The Morning Chronicle, No. 26705, 28 July 1852), The Times, No. 21180, 29 July 1852. - d They'll think of it.



