---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "75. Marx to Engels. 5 August "
Page_Range: "178-180"
---

# 75. Marx to Engels. 5 August 



**[p. 74]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 August 1852

Dear Engels,

Herewith the stuff for Dana.179 We must assail the fellow from all sides, the more so since that old farceur, Ruge, has actually deposited one of his stylistic excretions in a recent number.3

The Cologne affair has been adjourned by the court for 3 months at the request of the public prosecutor.b In other words, the principal witnesses have slipped through his fingers, Haupt to Brazil and a journeyman tailor to some lieu inconnuf

Do you think that Dana might take offence because of the similarity in the names of the English and American Whigs? 180

A detailed dispatch, probably, tomorrow.

Your

K. M.

75

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 5 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

Don't forget to let me have the rest of the thing6 by Tuesday. The section on the Tories is too short by itself. This time there is a twofold reason why the portions sent to Dana should not be too niggardly. 1. In Cincinnati that blackguard Heinzen is siding with

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t l m e

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a A. Ruge, 'The Public Law of Europe', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3506, 14 July 1852. - h Saedt - c place unknown - d See previous letter.





**[p. 146]**

since I have a frightful headache—not, however, from the effects

O f PALE ALE. It's regrettable that Dronke will not be here on Saturday.6 Goegg has called a general meeting of refugees for that day and the little man's presence would have been very desirable. For Pieper isn't the right person. At all events, Dronke must see to it that he is here when the rabble arrives from Berlin, for I cannot cope with these blackguards all by myself.

I have all manner of stuff from Cluss, too, to send you, which you will receive as soon as you send me a few STAMPS; otherwise the trash will cost you double and pour le moment1 I haven't a penny to send.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwerh- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

[^2]: a 'A German View of American "Democracy"', New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3505, 13 July 1852. - b in doubt - c 'The Approaching Election in the United States', The Times, No. 21186, 5 August 1852. - d for Engels to translate (see this volume, p. 145) - e 7 August - f for the time being



