---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "77. Marx to Engels. 6 August "
Page_Range: "181-186"
---

# 77. Marx to Engels. 6 August 



**[p. 148]**

Moreover, towards the end of June I was unable, owing to all sorts of circumstances, to charge up to my old man a number of extras which have now been placed to my account. Meanwhile, we are busy with the balance sheet; actually it is no concern of mine, but it will at least give me some indication of how far I can go. If it turns out well—which I shall know in some 4-6 weeks' time, I might be able to chance something, in which case you will at once receive some money. Only this month, because of the £20 or £25 I owe the business, I am absolutely stuck.

I don't know how I can arrange to do an article on GERMANY for Dana behind Dronke's back—he knows nothing about the matter.181 At the office I have my hands completely full until 7 o'clock in the evening, so I can't do it there. Cependant je verrai!3

Warmest regards to your wife and children from

Your

F. E.

Enclosed STAMPS to the value of 9/- and a few pence. Dronke asks me to tell you that he will probably be coming at the beginning of next week.

[London,] 6 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

You will see from one of the enclosed letters from Cluss that Mr Kinkel stated in a BOURGEOIS CIRCLE in Cincinnati: 'Marx and Engels

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: 77 MARX TO ENGELS182

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: D'abord* then, the incident with Johann Gottfried Kinkel.d

[^5]: a poor lad, you ought to see him in the throes of more or less virginal emotion - b However, I shall see. - c To begin with - d See this volume, pp. 138- 39.





**[p. 149]**

Knowing my Gottfried, I began by sending him the following note in which I pretended to be not quite sure of the facts, thereby giving him fresh occasion for ambiguities:

'5 Sutton Street, Soho, Office of The People's Paper,

'22 July 1852 'To Dr Johann Gottfried Kinkel

'You are alleged, or so I am informed, to have ventured the following statement before Anneke or other Germans at Cincin- nati (the passage follows). I await your explanation by return of post. Silence will be regarded as an admission.

Dr K. Marx'

Kinkel sent the following note by return:

'To Dr Karl Marx

Since the article about me was published under your auspices during my imprisonment, I have wanted to have nothing more to do with you. If you believe that you can, through the testimony of Anneke or other honourable men, rather than through anonymous insinuations, provide proof that I untruthfully said or published anything detrimental to your own or Mr Engels' honour, I must point out to you, as I would to anyone with whom I have neither personal nor political contacts, the usual way which, under the law, is open to everyone who feels himself insulted or libelled. Except in this way, I shall have no further dealings with you.

Since it was evident from this scrawl that Mr Gottfried would neither accept letters bearing a SOHO POSTMARK nor admit messen- gers, I got Lupus to post a note to him from Windsor on paper of the kind used for a billet-doux, bearing a posy of roses and forget-me-nots printed in colour, and having the following content:

'To Dr Johann etc. Kinkel

'In juxtaposition with a written statement, now before me, by your guarantor Huzel whom you cravenly required at Cincinnati to give his word of honour to keep silent about your mendacious gossip there, a promise which, however, was given only conditionally by Huzel;

'with a letter, likewise before me, written some time earlier by Dr Gottfried Kinkel in his own hand to his ex-guarantor Cluss, in which

[^1]: Gottfried Kinkel





**[p. 150]**

'your letter—and this is precisely why 'it was provoked — provides a new and striking proof that the said Kinkel is a cleric whose baseness is only equalled by his cowardice.

Dr Karl Marx'

This last was swallowed in silence by Mr Johann etc. who, since then, has carefully avoided letting us hear anything more from him.

Kossuth's secret circular, which Cluss speaks of in his last letter, you will find in English in tomorrow's issue of Jones' PAPER.184 Hence I am not enclosing it.

The meeting of Kinkel's guarantors took place on Tuesday 3 August. The chief item was the following: Reichenbach is guarding the exchequer like a Cerberus. The £200 so far spent by Kinkel and Willich was received from Gerstenberg, etc., against the revolutionary deposits. Statutorily, they may dispose of these only after at least 3 people have been nominated by the guarantors. And Reichenbach insists on observance of this formality. To remedy the inconvenience, Kinkel and Willich had decided to have Techow as the third nominee. True, Techow is sailing for Australia in 3 weeks' time. But, under the statutes of the loan, once the committee had its full complement of 3 members, it could on its own authority propose two more. Hence, the sole purpose of Techow's nomination was 1. to make Reichenbach hand over the exchequer, 2. to enable them later on to bring in 2 men of straw in Techow's place. However, the meeting immediately decided against Techow on the grounds that he was only being used as a cover and was leaving for Australia. Kinkel and Willich were told that their conduct of affairs was unsatisfactory, that they inspired no confidence and that they must submit a detailed account concerning the expenditure of the £200 before it could be ratified. This last and other decisions are to be SETTLED today, Friday the 6th, at a further guarantors' meeting.

At the sitting on the 3rd, Reichenbach proposed that the £1,000 be deposited in the Bank of England and left untouched until the outbreak of the revolution. Löwe (in alliance with Ruge) proposed that the money be handed over to the Revolutionary League in America.173

And although Kinkel himself stated, in the enclosed note to Huzel, that Ruge falsely suspected him of being an agent of Ü\e



**[p. 151]**

Last week Papa Goegg again convened his Agitation Club.26 An exact count revealed that it consisted of exactly 8 people, the place of Sigel and Fickler, who had disappeared, being taken by the newly-joined Oswald and Dralle. In addition it was found that, though Goegg had in the meantime acquired great fame as Kossuth's servant and has rendered 'sterling service' as an agitator for the Revolutionary League, he had otherwise not brought back even enough cash to cover the debts 'incurred to defray travelling expenses'. In these doubtful circumstances the agitatorsa felt compelled to attempt an alliance with Kinkel, in order that they might with decorum get at the £1,000. Kinkel likewise sees therein the last chance of avoiding an irreversible divorce from the £1,000. With the secret purpose of furthering this design, Goegg has convened a general meeting of refugees for tomorrow, the 7th, at Schärttner's. Ostensibly to report on his grands œuvres!' In fact, to be swept by general acclaim into an alliance with Kinkel and the £1,000. This may now not be accomplished.

But a third complication arises now, whose immediate effect is to debar both sides, Kinkel and Goegg, from the 'exchequer'. To be precise, on the one hand, our Eduard Meyen is agitating for the money to be used to launch a big LONDON WEEKLY PAPER. And, on the other, the 'critical' Edgar Bauer, who had barely heard of the predicament in which the £1,000 found itself, before he too crept forth and, taking up position behind Schily, Imandt, Schimmelpfennig, etc., also solicited a newspaper for himself. Imandt, etc., see this as the only means of rescuing the money from Kinkel and Goegg. Edgar Bauer adopts towards these people the appearance of a 'harmless humorist'.

I shall obtain an exact account of today's sitting since Imandt is now an L.M.C To revert to the one of the 3rd, I would mention the following: After questions of high policy had been dealt with,

[^1]: a members of the Agitation Club - b great works - c Communist League member





**[p. 152]**

All eyes were turned on Willich. Willich did not stir, but throughout the whole of this sitting, which saw the fading of so many 'golden' dreams, is said to have been the very personification of 'unhappy consciousness'.

Well, enough of that crap for today/ I have just received the enclosed letter from Freiligrath, from which it appears that cur Johnson remains adamant.3 Hence I am utterly at a loss what to do and my position is becoming abominable.

So honest Goegg has sent Freiligrath an invitation! He's one they can still never do without, but in the end they will have to.

My regards to the mandrake.b

Your

K. M.

It seems unlikely that your letter will arrive today, it being already 2 in the afternoon. Enclosed letters from Cluss:

1. 20 June. 2. 4 July. 3. 8 July, with Kinkel's circular. 4. Kinkel's circular of 2 August. 5. Cincinnati, 6 February^ letter from Kinkel to Huzel. 6. Letter from Hillgärtner to Huzel. 7. Letter from Cluss of 22 July.

[^1]: First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t , m e

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 147. - b Ernst Dronke - c April in the original



