---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "79. Marx to Engels. 10 August "
Page_Range: "186-190"
---

# 79. Marx to Engels. 10 August 



**[p. 78]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Monday evening [9 August 1852] Dear Marx,

I've done a stupid thing. In its MAIL TABLE the Daily News does not mention any American STEAMER for Wednesday — so I suc- cumbed to the Sunday indolence so natural to a commerçant? And today I see from a commercial circular that a STEAMER is in fact leaving the day after tomorrow. I have begun to work,b but nothing is ready. I have Pindar coming to see me this evening and even if I sent him away, I doubt whether I should get anything done in the few hours before the last post. Doncc you and I have been duped. But I shall never again make the mistake of believing the commercial intelligence provided by the organ of the bourgeoisie.

Your

F. E.

79

London, 10 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Printed according to the original 1929

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: MARX TO ENGELS182

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: First, I enclose the original text of Kossuth's SECRET CIRCULAR.184 Next, the report 1. on the guarantors' sitting of 6 August, 2. on Goegg's meeting of 7 August.

[^6]: a businessman - b Apparently on the English translation of Marx's article, 'The Chartists'. - ' So





**[p. 154]**

Kinkel had had the indispensable third member (Techow) of the alliance3 elected in America and Switzerland. There still remained the participation in the election of the 12-15 London guarantors. Here, as I told you, the election of Techow fell through and then he declared that he could not accept as he was leaving for Australia.b

Kinkel proposed to proceed with a new election of the third man. Fell through again.

Löwe of Calbe: First: 'The German loan has miscarried because the political circumstances (May 1852 186) in view of which it was undertaken are no longer present, and the presupposed amount of 20,000 dollars has not been raised.' Second: 'The monies to be returned to the American committees.'

The first part of this motion was carried, the second rejected.

Imandt: 'If the majority of the remaining guarantors share my view, the money to hand should be used to publish a German newspaper in London.' 'Reichenbach will remain TRUSTEE of the money.' 'A committee is to be elected consisting of Reichenbach, Löwe and Schimmelpfennig, and Kinkel and Willich will hand over to it the lists of the guarantors in America and Switzerland; the previous committee has nothing more to do with the matter; the new committee will advise the guarantors abroad of the resolutions taken and will obtain their opinion.'

Reichenbach supported Imandt's motions, all were carried. Kinkel and Willich protested on the grounds that the disposal of the money did not rest solely with the body of guarantors. Only the donors of the money, or respectively the finance committees set up in America, could exercise the right of disposal.

Sic transit gloria? Willich is more determined than ever to go t'o America, provided he can raise the fare.

As to 2. Meeting called by Finance Minister Goegg, back from America without finances.

Present: In the chair: 'Damm' himself (not yet slipped off to Australia). Goegg. Ronge. Dr Strauss. Sigel, the other one.d Franck (from Vienna). Oswald. Dralle. (These all 'agitators'.6) Kinkel. Schurz. Meyen. Willich. Imandt. Schily. Becker. One of Schärttner's

[^1]: a A paraphrase of the expression 'in eurem Bunde der dritte' from Schiller's poem 'Der Bürgschaft'. - b America in the original. See this volume, p. 150. - c Thus passes the glory. - d Albert Sigel - e members of the Agitation Club





**[p. 155]**

Goegg opened the sitting, described his activity in America, owing to which birth was given to a revolutionary league,173 an act as a result of which the American Republic was supposed to be 'tumbled' and hence birth to be given to a German-Baden republic—the victory of the American Democrats over the Whigs to be ensured, etc. The modest young man further asserted (an opinion attested by the newly arrived candidate of philosophy Hentze) that Germans in all provinces stood with their eyes fixed on London so that, at the crucial moment when those present at the meeting fell into each other's arms, they could let out a thunderous hurrah that would resound across the ocean a thousand times o'er. Hence he demanded that the meeting constitute itself a branch of the Revolutionary League and no longer leave their poor compatriots to languish in that attitude of expectancy.

Imandt: Thanked Goegg for his information on American conditions. Suggested moreover that the meeting should disperse, since only a general and publicly convened meeting of refugees could take a decision.

Damm ruled him out of order. Kinkel: (Already during Goegg's eloquent speech, this sensitive poet-martyr had, by rolling his eyes, signified his irrevocable determination to spread out his arms in reconciliation). He, too, was aware that Germany was looking to them. He was in a position to clasp the conciliatory hand. As a sacrifice to the cause, he would forget the grave injustice he had suffered. He, too, was aware that not only the liberation of Germany, but also the revolutionising of America, lay in their hands. None so great, said he, in an allusion to Ruge's 'agent of the Prince of Prussia',a as he who mastered himself. However he, for his part, demanded that the Revolution- ary League should also now guarantee his loan. Even though he and the 'honourable' Willich might not see eye to eye politically, nevertheless they would, he believed, have achieved great things together.

Imandt: Respected the Christian humility of Kinkel who had forgotten that Ruge had called him an agent of the Prince of Prussia, who had, for sheer love of the revolution, had repressed the indignation in his burning breast which, 2 months earlier

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 150-51.





**[p. 156]**

Incidents: Damm constantly interrupted Imandt and wanted to rule him out of order. As a Rhinelander, the tipsy Herweg felt obliged, so long as Imandt was present, to manifest approbation and, while Imandt was speaking of 'great men', he 'lorgnetted' the company with his pipe. During the passage about 'the proletarians', the painter, Franck, rose in indignation and said: 'I can't stand it any more. I grunt.' Imandt replied that this was

