---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "80. Engels to Marx. 16 August "
Page_Range: "190-192"
---

# 80. Engels to Marx. 16 August 



**[p. 157]**

Conclusion: The sitting went on for 2 more hours. Goegg pleaded that they should join the Revolutionary League, at least temporarily. The afore-mentioned stripling from Vienna declared anyone who delayed in joining by so much as an hour to be a 'traitor to his country'. Nevertheless, after the majority had rejected every, I repeat, every motion, the company went home without having founded a branch of the American-European- Australian Revolutionary League.

Your

K. M.

First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, 1929 t i m e

80

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 16 August 1852

Dear Marx,

This evening I have been promised the £2 borrowed from me a short while ago; if I get it, I shall send you it at once tomorrow by P.O. order and shall also write at great length.

Since we've heard nothing further from Weydemeyer and, according to Cluss' letters, the things seem at last to have been sent off,a it might be advisable for us to inquire from Edwards, Sanford and Co. in Liverpool whether they have received any

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Copies of the Revolution containing Marx's Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, see this volume, p. 160.

[^3]: 7-2736





**[p. 158]**

From your report it would seem that the resolutions of 3 [August] have for the present snatched the money from Mr Kinkel's grasp.a Mr Imandt does pretty well for himself after his own fashion. C'est drôle, quand un Schapper nous échappe, un Imandt est toujours sûr de revenir à nous.h But he is at any rate a deus minimorum gentium, canis domesticus communismi germanica and as such is useful, since we have now learnt to keep lesser folk of this kind on a short rein.

The noble Willich's bosom must be much lacerated now that separation from the emigration's coffre-fort'1 has sprung the last band holding his noble consciousness together. He must, moreover, have notified his trusties over there long ago of his arrival since the latter, on the strength of an important letter from Willich, have already convened big extraordinary general meet- ings. Mr Willich will become head of the LOAFERS and ROWDIES there, and as such will have a rare opportunity of distinguishing himself. What is more, he will also find his old enemy Schramme there, and that will lead to some pretty rows.

How delectable that Mr Kossuth has actually already caused companies to be drilled and Napoleon-Sigel is playing the instructor of the recruits. What an unspeakable swindler this Kossuth is; driving him out of America was one of the most splendid coups ever perpetrated by Cluss.184

By the way I shall very soon be doing the Hungarian campaign' and shall write direct to Brockhaus this very week. If he has no faith in my military qualifications, I shall arrange previously to do one or two cogent articles for the Gegenwart so that he can see what there is to them. Dronke's connection with Brockhaus is very good and must be exploited. For Brockhaus is after all one of the more tractable booksellers. Nous allons voir?

I was interrupted while writing the article for Danah last Thursday and shall, if possible, make up for it by doing 2 this week. I also expect something more from you on England.18 Last week there could be little thought of work. While Dronke was here

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 149-50. - b It's curious, whenever we lose a Schapper, an Imandt is always sure to come back to us (pun on Schapper and échappe). - c god of the minor nation, house-dog of German communism - d strong-box - e Conrad Schramm - f See this volume, pp. 104 and 128. - s We shall see. - h for the series Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany



