---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "81. Marx to Engels. 19 August "
Page_Range: "192-196"
---

# 81. Marx to Engels. 19 August 



**[p. 159]**

Your

F. E.

First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t l m e : 1929

81

MARX T O ENGELS 1 8 8

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

As regards the Hungarian war, you would probably do well to have a look also at the following:

The Fortress of Komarom (Comorn) during the War of Independence in Hungary, by Colonel Sigismund Thaly. Translated (from the German) by William Rushton. James Madden, Leadenhead Street.

Kausler: Kriegsgeschichte aller Völker. Ulm 1825. Wörterbuch und Atlas der Schlachten. 1825 and 1831. (The only two general military histories. Said to be meagre.)

Guerard: Encyclopädie der Kriegskunst. 2nd ed. Vienna 1833.

[^1]: I had 10/- handed to me by Dronke. Yesterday £2 by post. However welcome the money was, I find it most ennuyant* that you should squeeze yourself dry for me, and this at a moment when you yourself are plus ou moinsb in a fix.

[^2]: As regards works on military matters, since you intend to go thoroughly into the whole LINE, I would cite the following in case you might consider one or another of them worth acquiring:

[^3]: Carrion-Nisas: Essai sur l'historié générale de l'art militaire etc. Paris 1824.

[^4]: a annoying - b more or less

[^5]: 7*





**[p. 160]**

J.A.M.-r (Millerbacher): Das Kriegswesen der Römer, nach antiken Denkmalen geordnet von Ottenberger. Prague 1824.

Löhr: Das Kriegswesen der Griechen und Römer. 2nd ed. Würzburg 1830.

Blesson: Geschichte des Belagerungskriegs. Berlin 1821. Hoyer: Geschichte der Kriegskunst. Göttingen 1797. Chambray: Die Veränderungen in der Kriegskunst von 1700-1815. German. Berlin 1830.

Stenzel: Geschichte der Kriegsverfassung Deutschlands, besonders im Mittelalter. Berlin 1820.

Barthold: George v. Frundsberg. Hamburg 1833. Letters have arrived from Cluss which I shall send you as soon as I have shown them to Lupus and the little League.189

As regards Weydemeyer, Cluss writes as follows3:

'Not long ago, after some goading on my part, Weydemeyer wrote that he would have to put serious pressure on Korff who was supposed to have sent off the 50 Brumaires. Weydemeyer has, I believe, small sums owing to him from Korff and will therefore have charged him with the dispatch, and/or payment of the postai costs.

'The remaining 300 Brumaires not yet dispatched He claims that 500 copies are still held at the printers as a security and he hasn't yet been able to redeem them, etc. Financially, for one thing I cannot under any circumstances intervene just now, and for another I would not wish to do so even if I could. For time and again I have been told that such and such a sum would resolve everything, and time and again such and such a sum has been provided and resolved nothing. When the Revolution began, we were told to have faith and send in advance-payments without delay. I at once sent subscriptions to the tune of 10 dollars, which /, of course, subsequently lost Later it was said that the periodical was being put on its feet again and I was to find 20 dollars to that end; 18 dollars went off forthwith, 15 dollars from me personally and 3 dollars subscriptions. Instead of being used to carry on the business, this went to pay for the same old stupid bag of tricks, i.e. for the first 2 issues which had been sent out at random. The

[^1]: Brumaire arrived. Weydemeyer in despair. I told him I would instantly contribute 25-30 dollars if that would help, otherwise he was to send me the manuscript. Send me 25 dollars, he says; I do so. After a while it transpires that only 500 copies can be printed with the money available; no good, I tell him, how much more would it cost to print 1,000? 20 dollars, comes the reply, and the next day the money is already on its way.

[^2]: 'Now the poemsc arrive; they are to be printed in New York; when I insist that the nonsense must cease and the printing begin, I get the poems back, it having unfortunately proved impossible to print them just now in New York. I-at once

[^3]: a Cluss to Marx, 5 August 1852. - b K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. - ' F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer', I and II.





**[p. 161]**

'I shall write and tell Weydemeyer that, in so far as I am financially involved in this affair, I want you to use it in Europe for further publications in the interests of the party, or in any other way you yourself think fit, hence that so far as my share in all this is concerned, to send no money to America. In the case of the poems, I alone am involved, and so I alone have the final say in the matter.

'I shall therefore stake everything on getting the stuff sent off.'

Isn't that an exact replica of our Brussels-Westphalian aven- ture} 190 Last week I wrote to F. Streit in Coburg about the printing of the Brumaire; he deals in articles of this kind.191

Apropos. No. 15c appeared in the Tribune. In St Louis, Heinzen is now figuring for a change as an 'aristocrat of the intellect' (sic), ludicrous second-hand rehash of Feuerbach-Stirner; and since the Revolutionary League173 is going to pot, the 'aristocrat of the intellect' proposes a 'humanist' union.

In addition I have the following to report: On the 3rd, Kinkel and the coffre-fortd were duly divorced. Reichenbach deposited the money in the Bank of England in his own name.

At this gathering Kinkel feigned ignorance of the meeting convoked by Goegg and hence challenged Imandt in public to read out in public the invitation he had received. On the 6th, however, Goegg, turning to Kinkel, remarked: 'in accordance with the arrangement I made with you at your house'. Willich was not present.

Hentze, the candidate, endorsed all his own remarks by adding: 'as a D. Phil. I ought to know'.

Goegg explained how his Revolutionary League 1. provided a stay and support for Germans in America, 2. might, by influencing the elections, sway American policy and induce the United States to adopt a policy of intervention. On the material side, too, a start had been made. Contributions of one cent per week. BOXES in all public houses. Gottfried declared himself in agreement with all this. Only, he opined, contributions of a dollar would be preferable to contributions of a cent, no one in America

[^1]: a Cluss says 1,000 in his letter. - b Helmich - c F. Engels, Revolution and Counter- Revolution in Germany, XV. - d strong-box





**[p. 162]**

Quoth the great Kinkel, staring hard at Imandt the while:

'Despite all the calumnies that have been spread against'me, I can stand up with unruffled brow and say that I have never spoken ill of any exiled fellow citizen—not a single one.'*

Consequence: Since Kinkel had no money, but only his esteemed person, to offer by way of dowry, the latter was spurned, despite all his boot-licking and self-humiliation. The eight dynasts organised themselves into a Revolutionary League off their own bat and without co-opting Kinkel. The malheureuxlb

Schmölze, a born painter, is said to have done a rather nice set of cartoons, Kinkel as King Lear and Willich as the Fool. Also a cartoon in which Willich, as a sloth, squats in a fruit-tree while Mrs Schärttner on the ground shakes the tree to dislodge him.

Willich has been stupid enough to extend his ostracism to the honourable and elderly Mr 'Schily' and to expel him from his little League 189 for all sorts of imaginary crimes. Schily is appealing to a general meeting. Today is the day of the ordeal. For his part Schily accuses Willich of 'unmistakable insanity', as a proof of which he will this evening produce a letter from Heise, Willich's alleged friend in Liverpool, wherein Heise describes Willich as mentally deranged.

and with the 2 citizens who have so far been putting up the money. Sudden reprieve. Mac Gowan has taken over publication, will make good the weekly deficit, and Jones is now ensconced in the office of the old Northern Star. Mac Gowan has sacked Harney, and the idiot bought the old Star from him for £40.

According to the Gazette Agricole, the next harvest in France will be Vs BEiow THE AVERAGE which in France, according to J. B. Say,= FAMINE/ In Germany a middling harvest. In England there is already an outflow of gold from the Bank for corn purchases. At the same time, wild speculation in the City. Last week, bankrupt- cies on the STOCK EXCHANGE. Finally, in North America, as I see from the New-York Herald, the wildest of wild speculation in RAILWAYS, BANKS, housing, unprecedented expansion of the credit

[^1]: Last week friend Jones came within an ace of losing his newspaper/ Every week a deficit. At odds with the committee l92

[^2]: a Indirectly addressing to Marx in this way, Kinkel tried to justify himself in the face of the accusations moved against him, see this volume, p. 149. - b Poor thing! - c The People's Paper - d J. B. Say, Cours complet d'économie politique pratique, Paris, 1840, p. 394.



