---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "82. Marx to Heinrich Brockhaus. 19 August "
Page_Range: "196-197"
---

# 82. Marx to Heinrich Brockhaus. 19 August 



**[p. 163]**

Your

K. M.

First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K.Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English in full for the full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, f l r s t t l m e

1929

82

MARX TO HEINRICH BROCKHAUS

IN LEIPZIG

London, 19 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Sir,

I am writing to you to ask whether you could use in your Gegenwart a paper on 'Recent Literature on the Economy in England, from 1830-1852'. So far as I am aware, no work of this kind has yet been published either in English or in German. It would cover 1. general works on political economy, 2. specialised writings which appeared during that period, in so far as they relate to really important controversies, for instance on popula- tion, the colonies, the banking question, protective tariffs and free trade, etc.

Should you feel inclined to fall in with this proposal, I should have to know the length prescribed for such a paper by the economics of your publication, since the subdivision of the whole would have to be arranged accordingly.

Another paper which might perhaps be pertinent just now is 'The Present State of the Parties', i.e. those that will confront each other in the next Parliament. Awaiting your reply, I am

Yours faithfully

Dr K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



