---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "84. Marx to Engels. 27 August "
Page_Range: "199-200"
---

# 84. Marx to Engels. 27 August 



**[p. 84]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Frederick,

You will find enclosed:

1. Letter from Massol to me. The man upon whom he exerts influence is Proudhon, and the book which he regards as the happy (!) fruit of that influence is the latter's most recent book on Louis Bonaparte/ I shall be writing about this in one of my next letters.

2. Cluss' letter, an excerpt from which you have already had.b

3. A highly interesting letter from Jakob Huzel about Godo- fredus.196

4. A scribble by Goegg in the Schweizerische National-Zeilung. 5. and 6. "Draft of a treaty of union' between Kinkel, Willich and Goegg. A circular letter from the first-named gentlemen to their American committees and guarantors.197

The whole is a cry of distress from Kinkel-Willich. They wish 1. to remove the inflexible Reichenbach from the proximity of the Holy Graill98 so that they may use the funds 'with the utmost dispatch'.

2. Now that Kinkel no longer has an army behind him he wants to join the so-called Revolutionary League with £1,000 behind him, expecting the said League to show its gratitude by electing him to its highest committee.

3. Willich, hard-pressed and in an untenable position, wants-to go to America once he has, as he puts it, 'solved one more problem'. The problem is to feather a parasitical swindler's nest for himself in America by handing over the £1,000 to the Revolutionary League and by joining same.

More next time. Salut!

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel Zivi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K, Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart,

[^2]: jgl 3 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a P. J. Proudhori, La révolution sociale démontrée par le coup d'état du 2 décembre. - b See this volume, pp. 160-61.



