---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "85. Marx to Peter Imandt. 27 August "
Page_Range: "200-201"
---

# 85. Marx to Peter Imandt. 27 August 



**[p. 85]**

MARX TO PETER IMANDT

IN LONDON

[London,] 27 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Imandt,

2 truly memorable memoranda!197 If that's not champion drivel3 or however the saying goes.

However, in your place I would reply to the lads™9: At your guarantors' meeting you nominated a committee (provisional), consisting of Reichenbach, Löwe and Schurz, to settle matters. You were to await that committee's report. Kinkel and Willich were in no way empowered either to ask questions or to receive answers. Their threat that anyone in Europe failing to answer by 1 September (extremely short notice) would be held to be in agreement with them, is merely an attempt by them and Co., after their failure at the meeting, to take over the administration of the funds by stealth. You should protest against this procedure and say you will, if necessary, publish your protest with your full reasons for it.

At the same time I would write to Reichenbach: Repeat the foregoing and declare that he must see to it that not a centime is paid out until the committee nominated by yourselves has submitted its report. Draw his attention to a few of the chief points of the document, but more especially to the following:

I.e. what the gentlemen have in mind is to get the money out of Reichenbach's hands 'with the utmost dispatch' because great 'need has now arisen' for Willich and Co. to 'make use of the funds'.

[^1]: 'In order that we may make use of the funds if need arise, we propose that the guarantors in America accord us with the utmost dispatch the right to co-opt a third colleague. In which case we should elect either Goegg or some other local member of the Revolutionary League, etc' 20°

[^2]: You could slip into both these letters a few jokes about the 'treaty of union'.b

[^3]: a Marx uses the German saying: 'Wenn das nicht gut für die Wanzen ist, so weiß ich nicht, was besser ist.' - b See this volume, p. 166.



