---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "87. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 30 August "
Page_Range: "205-208"
---

# 87. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 30 August 



**[p. 172]**

I have it from a reliable source that that old fool Lelewel and Thaddäus Gorzowski have been here on behalf of the Polish 'Centralisation'.204 They submitted to Kossuth-Mazzini an insurrec- tionary plan of which Bonaparte's co-operation is the PIVOT. These old jackasses of conspirators are always putting their foot in it. They had, and continue to have, as agent here a certain Count Lanckoronski or some such. This lad (lives at 7 Harington Street, Hampstead Road) is a Russian agent, and their insurrectionary plan was done the honour of being amended beforehand in Petersburg.205

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

87

[London, 30 August 1852]

 This is how the gentlemenb have manoeuvring. They are ignoring their deposition by the guarantors in their immediate vicinity who have seen through them, and are endeavouring to obtain individual votes by stealth, which is partly why Schurz left for America. (A further object is to set up kindergartens there, after the style of the Friends of Light.201) They, who up till now have been vainly angling for unrestricted access to the administra-

[^1]: MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS206

[^2]: IN WASHINGTON

[^3]: a But that's not all. - b Kinkel and Willich





**[p. 173]**

The point d'argent3 is as follows: The chaps have spent £200, which would hardly be ratified here. By this coup, by the special powers they have received from the other guarantors, they hope to get the money out of Reichenbach's clutches and, above all, to make good the £200. This was their ploy: First, they send the documents of 11 and 12 August to America and Switzerland, behind the backs of the London guarantors. Then the letter was delivered to the latter on the 26th with the instruction that, if they failed to answer by 1 September, their silence would be taken for consent.

What will Weitling say on learning that the money will now be indirectly finding its way to the worthy Heinzen? The gentlemen were likewise careful not to mention that, despite Kinkel's recommendation and Goegg's pleading, the Revolutionary League's attempt to establish itself over here was a lamentable failure. Not a man allowed himself to be moved by them. What they now call the Revolutionary League in London is Ruge's clearly circumscribed following, seven in number, which formerly went by the name of Agitation Club. The said league comprises the following gentlemen: Ruge, Goegg, Franck (Vienna), Ronge, Tausenau, Sigel (the other one)b; Oswald, the tobacconist, and the arrogant Tralle have joined in place of Gen. Sigel and Fickler.

Willich is completely and utterly gone to the dogs. Schärttner has refused him his free meals and publicly shown him the door. He now proposes to go to America, where he hopes to be given a kind welcome from the Revolutionary League in return for his intention to bring them the £1,000 by way of a dowry. Schärttner had been solicitously accepted into the central authority of Willich's league. Willich's position in London has become com- pletely untenable; his parasitical existence is over once and for all. It would do no harm were these plans and grand designs of the patriots made public.

In the Kinkel-Willich document you will find the beautiful

[^1]: Tralle was denounced by Dulon in person because, at a time of peril, he ratted on his little Bremen paper.c

[^2]: a money matter - b Albert Sigel - c Bremer Tages-Chronik





**[p. 174]**

In a few days' time the revolutionary general Techow is leaving for Australia with Madame Schmidt (Stirner's wife). He has been living with her in this country for some time. But along comes his fiancée, on learning which Mrs Schmidt declares she will stand down. Then his affianced acquires another 'fiancé' and says she doesn't want Techow any more because of his having lived with the Schmidt woman, and that she is going to marry the other man. Nevertheless he lives in the same house as herself, and the fiancé (the other one) a few miles outside London. Poor Buridan- Techow!

Madame Pulszky was terribly put out, one of the American papers in which you mentioned her having arrived over here.

A propos. Szemere has sent his manuscript to Webb; but first he got a written agreement that it must be published as it stands. Let me solve the Szemere mystère for you. The chap is very tight-fisted, which is why he would rather get Webb to print his thing than do so himself, as he could perfectly well do

 A few days ago Félix Pyat called a reunion of his French adherents and laid before them a programme which is now to be published. 'God' had had a hand in it. One of those present objected to God finding lodgment in a revolutionary programme. In conformity with the gouvernement direct principle, Pyat put it to the vote. 'God' got by with a majority of 7. L'être suprême est sauvé encore une fois.c God doth not forsake his own, the saying used to go. Now it is: God's own do not forsake him. One good turn deserves another208

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to Cluss' letter Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, to Weydemeyer of 21 September Moscow, 1980 1852

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Play on the word, Fechten, which, besides 'fencing', can also mean 'door-to-door begging'. - b B. Szemere, Graf Ludwig Batthyâny, Arthur Görgei, Ludwig Kossuth - c The Supreme Being is saved once again.



