---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "93. Marx to Engels. 9 September "
Page_Range: "216-217"
---

# 93. Marx to Engels. 9 September 



**[p. 93]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 September 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

Received, the £4 Sperlinge.3

I have again written to my mater and think that at least it may do some good.191

Besides, I have today made another attempt, which I trust will at long last succeed, to obtain the money on Dana, for I am very hard-pressed, et je n'ai pas à perdre du temps!1

The doctor has just been and prescribed something for the whole FAMILY excepté moi.'1 My wife is getting better; little Laura's condition is worst of all.

You have no idea what a silly ass Pieper is! Every day he asks me whether you have sent the thingd back yet and what you had to say about his outstanding piece of work. Of course I couldn't tell him and now the clown imagines that out of envy I am withholding the praises you showered on him.

Today, when I went out to call the doctor, I ran into the humbug. 'Has Engels written and sent the translation?' Not yet, I told him, to which Pieper replied: 'But he will, for I myself have written to him.' Should you reply you might point out to him that there is no call for him to have any say in my transactions with 31011.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Enclosed a memorandum from Paris212; it fell into the hands of a friend of minec there who sent me a copy of it, and I have made a further copy for the Manchester archives.216

[^2]: First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the ftrst full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t i m e

[^3]: 1929

[^4]: a Marx wrote Sperlinge (sparrows) instead of 'sterling'. - b and I must lose no time - c except me - d Translation into English of the first chapter of Marx's work The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte made by Pieper (see this volume, p. 175). - e Zerffi



