---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "95. Marx to Engels. 18 September "
Page_Range: "218-219"
---

# 95. Marx to Engels. 18 September 



**[p. 185]**

Enclosed two things from Weydemeyer; you might let me have the Lithogr.2^ back some time for the archives. Häfner's memoran- dum212 is interesting, though obviously written for our consump- tion— c'est une pétition.

Best wishes to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

You'll be glad to see that Heinzen is on his last legs.218

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in M EGA, Published .n English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t I m e

95

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 18 September 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

If you delay sending back the translation13 for another few days, the possibility of getting it taken will be absolutely nil. Interest in Bonaparte, having again attained a peak,219 is now giving way to fresh topics, as always happens in London.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: The discounting affair has come to naught after a week spent on a wild goose-chase with a rascal from the CITY nomméc

[^3]: Poenisch. I therefore wrote to Dana yesterday.191 At the same time I told him that there were only two more articles, 19 and 20, to come ON GERMANY. AS soon as you send me 19d I shall write to you

[^4]: a Emil Blank - b of the first chapter of Marx's work The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see this volume, pp. 175 and 183) - c named - d F. Engels, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany, XIX.



