---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "96. Engels to Marx. 20 September "
Page_Range: "219-221"
---

# 96. Engels to Marx. 20 September 



**[p. 186]**

Physically, my wife is lower than ever before, i.e. sheer debility. On doctor's orders she has been taking a spoonful of brandy every hour for the past 3 days. There is however some improvement, inasmuch as she has at least got up today. She has been in bed for a week. Little Laura is convalescent, the others ALL RIGHT. I shall not be able to write at length before next week. This week has been wasted on abortive business errands and the most nauseous wrangling cum creditoribus?

Your

K. M.

With next week's letter I shall also return the documents. b Let me have Massol's letter back.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zun- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 t i m e

96

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 20 September 1852

Dear Marx,

I didn't know that you were in such a hurry for the translation ' and let the thing slide for a bit because, as I said,d I wasn't well, and also because I wanted to tease Pieper a little for having been so pressing. However, I immediately set to work yesterday and would have finished had not the aging Mr Schilye walked into my room at about 2 in the afternoon. He wishes to open a factory in

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a with creditors - b See this volume, p. 185. - c into English of the first chapter of K. Marx's work The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte - d See this volume, p. 184. - e Victor





**[p. 187]**

I was, of course, under an obligation to get the noble Schily tipsy—il n'y avait pas moyen à y échapper!1 It's some time since I encountered such an innocuous beast. The stupidity and ignor- ance and thoughtlessness of such a man of principle has to be seen to be believed. "When he had become a little tipsy—I was engaged in an argument with a third German, Charles" cousin—he shouted incessantly, although very good-humouredly: Don't you believe that; Engels believes in nothing, there's nothing at all Engels believes in, none of the fellows of the JV. Rh. Z. believe in anything, no one can fathom them. There's nothing at all Engels believes in! I, of course, replied that the fellows of the N. Rh. Z. did not find it in the least difficult to fathom the likes of him. This morning the worthy fellow, after a sober handshake, set course for Liverpool' again, and by tonight the translation will be finished. But I get dreadfully held up over the thing since I have to make a new translation of all the more difficult bits without exception— Pieper makes shift with a literal translation in every case, the result being utter nonsense. There are, by the way, some bits which are almost impossible to translate.

However, I will do my utmost to have finished by tonight so that you can have it tomorrow.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a An ironical reminiscence of Schiller's words 'Seid umschlungen, Millionen!' in his ode 'An die Freude' ('To Joy'). - b there was no escaping it - c Roesgen



