---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "99. Engels to Marx. 24 September "
Page_Range: "229-231"
---

# 99. Engels to Marx. 24 September 



**[p. 196]**

'NATIONAL PARTY'. T h i s NATIONAL PARTY W a n t S GENERAL SUFFRAGE, BUT NOT CHARTISM.232 The same old story. But before they launched their campaign Jones was to BE CRUSHED. They have RATHER miscalculated He has raised the price of his paperb by a penny without losing a single subscriber.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t i m e

99

ENGELS TO MARX84

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 24 September 1852

Dear Marx,

Encl. I return the envelope of the letter received from you today; an attempt, incidentally abortive, seems to have been made to break it open.

The translationc and Massol's letter went off yesterday evening by the 2nd post.

Cluss' description of Kinkel and Co.'s reception by the German Yankees is really nice. The chaps in the Alleghenies are the very spit of those in the Black Forest and the Taunus.

I haven't read the revelations in the German papersd—in fact, yesterday was the first time in some while that I saw a German paper.

The crapauds* are in clover.233 The workers would appear après tout1 to have become utterly bourgeoisified as a result of the present PROSPERITY and the prospect of la gloire de l'empire.* They

[^1]: a and all the rest - b The People's Paper - c into English of the first chapter of Marx's work The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte - d See this volume, p. 194. - e philistines - f after all - 8 imperial glory





**[p. 197]**

From what you tell me, the Cologne trial threatens to be terribly ennuyant? Unhappy Heinrich,*1 with his defence 'on principle'! He will demand that his 30 sheets be read in court and, if he gets his way, will be perdu? The jury will never forgive him for having bored them so. The prosecution, by the way, seems to be out of luck. For Haupt is off to Brazil, the anonymous journeyman tailor has similarly vanished and seems unlike to reappear, and now the police official/ because of whose illness the whole affair was adjourned in July, must needs go and die on them. But what will such good fortune be worth if Heinrich elucidates the thing from the philosophical standpoint?

So the gallant Schurz is carping at Kossuth for preaching the gospel of action, after he and Co. have for years eked out a bare living from this same gospel! IT IS ALL VERY WELL to try and settle Kossuth's hash because he takes the lion's share, but it's really very stupid to write things of that sort when the whole world knows better.

That Kossuth will commit some folly seems most probable; what has le malheureux* got after all but battered saddles, outranged

[^1]: a following - b Napoleon I - c tedious - d Bürgers (see this volume, p. 195) - e lost - f Schulz - s the unfortunate man



