---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "100. Marx to Engels. 28 September "
Page_Range: "231-234"
---

# 100. Marx to Engels. 28 September 



**[p. 198]**

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 f i r s t t i m e

100

MARX TO ENGELS234

IN MANCHESTER

London, 28 September 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

You have not had a letter from me for some time. The main cause of this is Weerth who—not I might say, to my unalloyed delight—has plus ou moins* monopolised my evenings which are usually given over to writing. As you know, I'm very fond of Weerth, maish it's embarrassing, when one's up to one's neck in trouble, to have to face so fine a gentleman, auquel il faut cacher les parties trop honteuses!" Such a relationship creates twice as much gêned

and I hope he will leave for Manchester tomorrow and will on his return find me in circumstances that will enable me to consort with him franchement.' However, I don't believe that, aside from my wife's ill-health, he had any inkling of my predicament.

I have given him a big parcel to take to you. It contains documents that belong in the archives216; some, if not most of them are already familiar to you.

Enclosed the extract from a letter from Barthélémy to Willich. Barthélémy gave this letter to a Frenchman by the name of

[^1]: a more or less - b but - c from whom the most shameful aspects must be concealed - d embarrassment - e frankly





**[p. 199]**

penses-tu de ce brave Barthélémy, 'auquel il est impossible de se résigner à laisser Bonaparte jouir paisiblement de son triomphe'? Tremble, O Byzantium!b As to the alleged letter from Blanqui, this strikes me as a piece of melodramatic falsehood on the sinister Barthélemy's part. For what news does he give of Blanqui? That the situation of the prisonniers de Belle-Ile est bien triste? If that is all Blanqui had to divulge to him, he would have done better to keep his libri tristiuma to himself. Incidentally, Barthélemy's whole letter shows that he is completely out of touch with the French emigration and the French societies in France.

In order that you, too, may 'adopt to some extent the standpoint of world history'6 I enclose an article from the Augsburg Allgemeine on the spy A. Majer who, here in London, was actually 'chucked out of the house' by his bosom friends, Willich and Schapper.

I have, I presume, already told you that Herzen is here and is sending round memoirs against Herwegh,235 who has not only cuckolded him but has extorted 80,000 fr. from him.

I have not yet been able to do any work on an article or even on the draft of the final instalment of the German article.214 So engrossed have I been by the incessant correspondence arising out of my domestic troubles that it is 3 weeks since I went to the library—which I also forbore from doing in order to sustain my wife during what was for her a ghastly time.

Apropos! There is no doubt that the Orleanist conspiracy shows greater activity, scope and prospects every day. The gentlemen have coalesced with Cavaignac, Charras, Lamoricière, Bedeau. Of L. Bonaparte's aides-de-camp 3 have been bought, i.e. substantial sums have been deposited on their behalf in the Bank of England. The following contract has been entered into with the out-and-out

[^1]: a What do you think of the honest Barthélémy 'who finds it impossible to resign himself to allow Bonaparte to enjoy his triumph in peace'. - b Words from Donizetti's opera Belistxrio, libretto by S. Cammarano, Act II, Scene 3. - c the prisoners on Belle-Ile is very sad. - d tale of woe (an allusion to Ovid's Tristia) - e From Jordan's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly (July 1848) (see 'The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question', present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 360-64).



The Jew, Fould, is in constant touch with the Orleans. The undertaking has been tentatively fixed for the month of March, when Bonaparte will, if necessary, be assassinated by his aides-de- camp. But they would prefer Bonaparte to have become emperor first and done further damage to himself.

I myself have talked to the Orleanist agent3 who travels freely to and fro between Paris and London. The day before yesterday he and Bangya went to see the Due d'Aumale.

I see from a letter of Piali's that, at a private audience in London, Lord Palmerston told a fugitive Italian noblewomanb all manner of comforting things about Italy, and held out what was to him the no less 'comforting' prospect of becoming British prime minister within the space of a year. How addicted to lies and

vanité is old age! Incidentally on one point at least Mr Palmerston did not mince his words. In case of insurrection Lombardy and Venice must, he said, at once unite with Piedmont. The pipe-dreams of an 'Italian republic' must be left to 'the future'.236

Dronke, inmate of the MODEL LODGING HOUSE, says he is sorry he has not written. 'He has his reasons.'

Your

K. M.

There is no doubt that an attempt, obviously clumsy and unsuccessful, was made to open my last envelope, which you returned to me.

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin,

[^2]: 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: Rémusat - b Marquise Visconti



