---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "102. Engels to Marx. 4 October "
Page_Range: "234-237"
---

# 102. Engels to Marx. 4 October 



**[p. 101]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, after 28 September 1852] Dear Marx,

Have still not seen or heard anything of Weerth. Why the devil should you feel ill at ease with the fellow? In any case, he knows quite well that you've been down on your luck for years and he also knows how things are now, if only from the fact that you're still stuck in those old lodgings.

I have been removed, i.e. my old landlady has removed, and has carted me with her sans façon." It's two doors away, so in future address letters to No. 48 (new numbering) instead of No. 70.

In haste,

Your

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1929

102

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] 4 October 1852 48 Great Ducie Street

Dear Marx,

Encl. £2. 10. -. Give the 10/- to Dronke, who has searched out a very valuable Slav bookb for me—the amount by which he beat the fellow down is his commission for the discovery; puisqu'il est commerçant, il faut le traiter selon les principes du commerce! But tell

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a without more ado - b R. A. Fröhlich, Kurzgefaßte tabellarisch bearbeitete Anleitung zur schnellen Erlernung der vier slavischen Hauptsprachen. - c Since he's a businessman he has to be treated in accordance with business principles.



As soon as I can see my way somewhat more clearly this month, you shall get more. There are a few debts to be paid, how many I don't yet know. On this will depend how much I can send you.

Weerth is in Bradford. He won't be here for a week, yet.

Le roman Pindar prend une tournure tout à fait bourgeoise.* The poor boy is already suffering from remorse. Because I have given him no news of his wife and mother since the fifteenth of September, he is bombarding me with letters and threatening to write to them direct for news! The fellow seems to imagine that I spend all my days there, as though the Finnish features and Scandinavian- Germanic heart of his cold-blooded better half were as bewitching to me as they were and still are to him. By his evasion? Master Pindar had once more gone up a little in my estimation, but these letters bring him right down again. He is a Slav through and through, sentimental in his frivolity and even in his beastliness, servile and arrogant; and he has nothing of the Englishman save in exaggerated—being a Russian, he must exaggerate— taciturnity. Recently the fellow had grown somewhat more garrulous, yet when the long-closed sluice gates finally opened, nothing came out but fadaise!1 On top of that the lovelorn Pindar has exceedingly unsavoury appetites and likes nothing better than to discuss unnatural discoveries. He's wholly uncultivated and withal pedantic, knowing absolutely nothing except a language or two; en matière de science^ even the most ordinary mathematics, physics and other school subjects, and especially in history of the most elementary kind, he is utterly ignorant. Ce n'est que son silence acharné qui ait pu faire croire qu'il soit profond." He is ni plus ni moins1 than a little Russian bourgeois with the appetites of the

[^1]: a Pindar's romance is taking an altogether bourgeois turn. - b running away - c fiddle-faddle - d in the field of science - e It's only his obstinate silence which has lent him a semblance of profundity. - f neither more nor less





**[p. 203]**

nor Balzac; of that he has given me ample and frequent proof. He doesn't know German, no doubt of that, since he fails to understand the simplest things. I also greatly doubt whether he knows French. Once the mystère with which he held one's interest has gone, nothing remains but une existence manquée} Yet in his letters the fellow tries to spin out the mystère that has long since been unveiled; it's ridiculous. You'll see! Within three months gospodinc Pindar will be back again, bon fils, bon époux, bon bourgeois, plus taciturne que jamais,0 and will continue as before to squander what remains of his mother's fortune without making the slightest attempt to set his hand to anything or study anything. And a fellow like that goes and runs away with an experienced Parisienne—she'll make him rue the day.

The latest story about the truthful Willich's falsehood is good indeed.'

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - b wasted existence - c Mr - d a good son, a good husband, a good bourgeois, more taciturn than ever - e See this volume, p. 195.



