---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "103. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 5 October "
Page_Range: "237-238"
---

# 103. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 5 October 



**[p. 204]**

Your

F. E.

First published in part in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

103

MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS

IN WASHINGTON

London, 5 October 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Cluss,

Your letter of 16 September3 arrived very late today. I am therefore sending only a few lines in reply, since you ask for an answer by return. Next Friday a rather more substantial report will be going off to you.b My information about the Brüningk woman (she's not a spy but corresponds with her aunt, the Princess Lieven, in Paris, who is notoriously one) came from Bangya. The latter, however, has very important reasons for not being named. If he were, he would forfeit many 'sources of information' which, being important to us, must be preserved.

You can write and tell Schnauffer that he merely has to answer that no further authorities need be cited since his (Brüningk's) two friends, Kinkel and Willich, have themselves been spreading it about in London that Mrs von Brüningk has suspect political connec- tions.

That Willich has been saying things of this kind is so well known that Schimmelpfennig has taken him to task about it. If necessary, witnesses can be cited to support this.

Kinkel voiced this suspicion outright, e.g. to his friend Kamm,

[^1]: a 26 September in the original. - b See next letter.



