---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "105. Engels to Marx. 10 October "
Page_Range: "241-243"
---

# 105. Engels to Marx. 10 October 



**[p. 208]**

Meiners and Ségur drew on: Alexander (W.), History of Women etc., 2 vols. London 1782, 3rd ed.

Thomas (de l'Ac. franc.), Essai sur le caractère etc. des femmes etc., Paris 1773.

For the manner in which the Hegelian school finally sums the thing up—that old buffoon Ruge, now apparently in his dotage, is too stupid to count—see:

Unger (J.), Die Ehe in ihrer welthistorischen Entwicklung. Vienna 1850.

This 'bibliography' will enable you not only to deprive the unhappy Heinzen of all desire to pass off as new discoveries a few platitudes filched from the socialists but also to provide the German-American public, if interested in the subject, with the sources where the material may be found. ->

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, , Moscow 1934 Published m English tor the first time

105

ENGELS TO MARX

[Manchester,] Sunday, 10 October 1852

Dear Marx,

Month after month we are told it will appear and it never does. One excuse after another is trotted out and then dropped. Finally it is said to be definitely coming out at Michaelmas. La Trinité se passe, Marlbrough ne revient pas/ Quite the contrary, for now we hear the man is dead and Bangya doesn't know what has become

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: I am fed up with the perpetual delays over the pamphlet.3

[^3]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - b Trinity goes by but Marlbrough does not return (from a French satirical song composed during the War of the Spanish Succession).





**[p. 209]**

Papa Kinkel is coming up here to give German lectures under the auspices of third and fourth rate poetical Jews. Cela sera beau!" The secretary of the Athenaeum244 tried to induce m e to subscribe with the remark: 'WHEREVER THERE WAS SOMETHING LIKE A CHEQUERED LIFE,

No other news. Write and tell me if you hear anything more about the affair of the pamphlet, but it's hardly likely to affect my decision respecting Charles. Warmest regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: WERE IT ONLY AN ESCAPE FROM A SHIPWRECK OR SO, THERE WAS ALWAYS A NATURAL AND FAIR GROUND FOR SYMPATHY.' Voilà les arguments qu'on emploie pour lui mendier un auditoire!1

[^2]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Roesgen - b document - c That will be nice. - d Such are the arguments used to obtain an audience for him.



