---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "107. Engels to Marx. 14 October "
Page_Range: "244-245"
---

# 107. Engels to Marx. 14 October 



**[p. 107]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, 14 October 1852]

Dear Marx,

It is physically impossible to translate the whole article for you. I received it this morning. Have been so busy at the office all day that I didn't know whether I was coming or going. This evening took tea at 7-8 and just glanced through the thing. Then got down to translating. Now—11.30—have done the part I am sending you,a up to the natural break in the article. At 12 o'clock it must be in the post. So, you see, you will get as much as can possibly be done.

The restb will be translated directly—next week you can send it either via Southampton or on Friday.0 In the meantime finish off your next article; part of it might be able to go on Friday, if not, the following Tuesday, when there is another YANKEE STEAMER. So it doesn't really matter. But make sure I get the manuscript early; I am expecting Weerth any day and will then have to try to make best use of my time, since my days are more than fully taken up with business.

Regards to your wife and children, Dronke, Lupus, Freiligrath.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Mark my word, the Cologne people won't get off. What a cur the presiding judge d is to bait Bürgers so.248

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'Pauperism and Free Trade.—The Approaching Commercial Crisis'. - b K.. Marx, 'Political Consequences of the Commercial Excitement'. - c 22 October - d Göbel



