---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "108. Engels to Marx. 18 October "
Page_Range: "245-246"
---

# 108. Engels to Marx. 18 October 



**[p. 108]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester,] 18 October 1852

Dear Marx,

Herewith the remainder of the recent3 article.b Yesterday I also received the next one.249 You can at once dispatch VIA LIVERPOOL PER UNITED STATES MAIL STEAMER the piece I am posting you today; the Pacific sails on Wednesday morning. You will be getting some more on Friday.c

You really must stop making your articles so long. Dana cannot possibly want more than 1-1V2 columns, it would be too much for one number. I shall again have to split this new article, but it's difficult to do and I don't yet know where. Five-7 pages in your wife's handwriting is quite enough and if you give more in one article, Dana won't even thank you for it.

Bürgers and Röser, and perhaps Otto and Nothjung likewise, seem to me pretty well done for. There doesn't appear to be anything at all against Daniels, Beckerd or Jacobi, and I hope that these at least will get off. Becker has extricated himself with great effrontery. The more these are exonerated the greater, I think, will be the zeal with which the judges and jury will set about the compromised men; the injured bourgeoisie and the injured State want their victims.

The edges of the seals on all the letters I am getting from you show signs of having been gone over with a hot iron but, so far as I can judge, pour le roi de Prusse." The gum on the envelope prevents them from getting inside.

Weerth is here, has brought me the parcel, and sends his regards to you all. Szemere's manuscript on Kossuth is far better than the one on Görgey—he's a match for Kossuth. I have not yet

[^1]: a Barely legible in the original. - b K. Marx, 'Political Consequences of the Commercial Excitement'. - c 22 October - d Hermann Becker - e literally: for the king of Prussia; figuratively: in vain



