---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "112. Marx to Engels. 25 October "
Page_Range: "248-250"
---

# 112. Marx to Engels. 25 October 



**[p. 215]**

So we are now recognised by the State, and even by the police, as 'intelligent' people, testeb Stieber. A fine business. The way that stupid Stieber tries to shuffle off responsibility for his own spy, Cherval, onto our chaps!251 Have you any idea why Kothes and Bermbach have been arrested?0 Those two, of all people—it's ominous! But we shall discipline Haupt.252 Weerth will find out where he is in South America and, on his arrival there, will unmask him. To that end we shall have to get hold of the

Kölnische Ztg. or some other paper containing his statements. Could you not attend to this? Do everything you can; it would really be splendid to make the rascal feel the power of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung as far away as Brazil.

More in a day or two, and also translations.253

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original Zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Published in English for the first III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l n i e

112

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 25 October 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

We must make some other arrangements about our correspon- dence. We undoubtedly have a fellow-reader in Derby's Ministry. Moreover, there is again someone keeping watch, or at least attempting to do so, outside my house (of an evening). Hence I

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Pleyel - b witness - c See this volume, p. 216.



Dana is treating me very badly. I wrote to him about 6 weeks ago, telling him exactly how things stood with me and that I must be paid by return for the articles I had sent. He has regularly published the articles but has not yet sent the money. I, of course, must continue punctiliously, notwithstanding. Otherwise it is I who will suffer in the end.

Now, as much as 5 weeks ago, I mollified my LANDLORD with my prospects in America. Today the fellow calls and makes a fearful scene in front of me and the HOUSEKEEPER. Upon my finally resorting to the ultima ratio,3 i.e. abuse, he retired, threatening that if I didn't produce any money this week, he would throw me out into the street, but first would land me with a BROKER.

4-5 days ago 130 copies of the Brumaire arrived from Cluss. As yet I have been unable to get them from the customs because this would mean paying 10/9d. As soon as I've got the stuff out, I'll send it to the place you know and at once draw a bill on the same. With this and the Dana business I now have over £30 outstanding, yet often have to lose an entire day for a shilling. I assure you that, when I consider my wife's sufferings and my own impotence, I feel like consigning myself to the devil.

Kothes and Bermbach were arrested because I had sent the latter through the former a work necessary to the defence, which (despite thin paper and small pearl type) was somewhat bulky.254

The government thought it had made a splendid catch. But on the closer examination jeuneb Saedt raised heaven and earth to have the thing suppressed, for the document contained curious STRICTURES on the capability, etc., of jeune Saedt and could, if communicated to the juries, only help to acquit the accusés."

In the Neue Preussische Zeitung, 'G. Weerth' is said to be a member of the Central Authority in Cologne, and, indeed, this is cited from the bill of indictment.

Your

K. M.

As soon as the trial is over, and whatever its outcome, we two must bring out one or two sheets, 'For the Enlightenment of the

[^1]: Tell Weerth that I have heard nothing from Duncker.255

[^2]: a last resort - b young - c accused



