---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "113. Marx to Engels. 26 October "
Page_Range: "250-251"
---

# 113. Marx to Engels. 26 October 



**[p. 217]**

Cherval has himself written to the German Workers' Society in London24: saying that he 'is a spy, but in the noble sense of "Cooper's spy"'.0 I have conveyed the necessary explanation to one of the lawyers'1 by a safe route.

We should already start casting about with a view to the publication on the 'Cologne trial' mooted above. I think it would be best if you were to write to Campe asking him to give you the name of a reliable agent, should he himself be too afraid. Since your credit is good, the agent can be told that he will receive the money in, say, 3 months' time (against a bill), if he has not in the meantime repaid himself from the sales (as he certainly will do). For that matter, the cost of printing this sort of stuff would amount at most to 25 talers.

Vale!e And think the matter over. We cannot remain silent and if we don't see to the printing in good time, we shall again miss the boat. We should, of course, have to make sure that the agent is not downright dishonest, for the thing will even have 'commercial' value.

113

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 26 October [1852]

Dear Engels,

Tomorrow morning Weerth will find, along with this scrawl, a letter from me addressed to him at Steinthal's and enclosed in it another to Schneider II,256 which you should attend to forthwith. The

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: a nation at large - b Bürgers - c Harvey Birch, character in F. Cooper's Spy. - d Schneider II. The letter has not been found. - e Farewell.



