---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "114. Engels to Marx. 27 October "
Page_Range: "251-253"
---

# 114. Engels to Marx. 27 October 



**[p. 218]**

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, _ , ,. , , . _ ,. , . jota Published in English for the first time

114

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 27 October 1852

D. M.,

When I wrote yesterday,237 I had only cursorily read Stieber's statements and was therefore most agreeably surprised today when your document3 gave a turn to the case which now no longer makes me despair of the acquittal of all the accused. En effet,b

Stieber will be utterly discredited. I made a further copy of the thing and dispatched it to Cologne by 2 different and very good routes258; I also did what should already have been done in London, namely affixed the 2 notes in Hirsch's handwriting259 to the original with sealing-wax, at the same time recording the fact by appending my signature so that, if the worst comes to the worst, they cannot be detained unless the whole thing is detained. I have now discovered several more ways of communicating with Cologne and, although there is a 99% chance that the things will reach Schneider safely and on the same day by the first two routes (which, however, cannot be used again), it might be advisable for you to send me a 3rd copy, authenticated by you, with fresh samples of Hirsch's handwriting, which I could then send by yet another route. Anyway, the Prussians cannot detain this thing; it would mean criminal proceedings against those involved.

[^1]: a See previous letter. - b Indeed





**[p. 219]**

By employing all these methods alternately we shall achieve adequate security. In addition, to make it less conspicuous, you should send letters containing matters of no consequence direct by post, and I shall do the same.

Copying out the document has made such demands on my time that I really don't know whether I shall be able to keep my word in the fullest sense as regards Dana and Friday'sb STEAMER. At all events, something will be forthcoming. You might bear in mind that a lengthy spell of more or less uninterrupted chaste living is again causing me to burgeon like mad at a certain spot, and at times prevents me from sitting down; il faut que cela finisse?

The statement made by old Justizrat Müller will have put Stieber into a blue funk over his original minutes.260 It also reveals how incensed jurists over there must be by the infamies of the police which Stieber, in his old-Prussian ignorance of Rhenish law, judicial procedure and Rhenish public opinion, is so unashamedly

[^1]: a Steinthal, see this volume, p. 217. - b 29 October. Engels had in mind the translation of Marx's two articles: 'Political Parties and Prospects' and 'Attempts to Form a New Opposition Party'. - c this must cease



