---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "115. Marx to Engels. 27 October "
Page_Range: "253-254"
---

# 115. Marx to Engels. 27 October 



**[p. 220]**

It's a pretty state of affairs: the police steal, forge, break into desks, perjure themselves, give false evidence and, withal, claim this privilege vis-à-vis communists who are hors la sociétéh\ This, and the way in which the police, at their most rascally, are usurping all the functions of the prosecution, pushing Saedt into the background, and submitting unauthenticated scraps of paper, mere rumours, reports and hearsay, as things legally proven, as evidence—c'est trop fort]c It's bound to have an effect.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English for the first time

115

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 27 October 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I wrote and told you that I would compose a 'Lithographed Circular' about the 'Cologne trial'.d That 'L. C has now become a pamphlet of some 3 sheets.261 The thing cannot be lithographed now for two reasons: firstly, such an extensive lithograph would prove very expensive while yielding nothing, for one could not in all decency sell a lithographed circular of this kind. Secondly, nobody could read or be expected to read, a lithograph of 3 printed sheets.

So the only thing to do is to get the thing printed. IMPOSSIBLE in Germany. London is the only conceivable place. It will also be

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a It's a good portent. - b outside society - c it's too much! - d See this volume, p. 217.



