---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "120. Marx to Engels. 2 November "
Page_Range: "268-269"
---

# 120. Marx to Engels. 2 November 



**[p. 120]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 2 November 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

Received your letter together with £5. 10/- given to Dronke. The time when we had to be coy about writing openly to each other's actual addresses is now past. On Saturday (30 October) the lawyers received the bulk of the documents, on Sunday, the second letter from Frankfurt, and yesterday my last letter with the DECLARATION before the magistrate." Today I have sent by registered post direct to Schneider II the declarationb which appeared in today's Morning Advertiser, not so much because there was still any necessity to do so, as to show the Prussian government that we possess the means to insist on the integrity of its mails or, failing that, to expose it before the London public.

The lawyers received all they needed in good time, i.e. before the prosecution closed its case. At present I am of the opinion that, unless some incident should prolong the trial and thus necessitate renewed intervention on our part, nothing more should go off to Cologne.

Herewith a letter from Imandt to Cluss, which contains more details about Kinkel's and Willich's escroquerie.0 Up till now I hadn't had time to read the letter and had done no more than have it copied out for you by Pieper. It went off to Washington last Friday.0

Fleury, a merchant in the CITY, says that he can bear witness that he and other businessmen have been invited by Kinkel and Willich to purchase Loan Notes.

Just now that chevalier d'industrie," Willich, is living on the bounty of the Russian, Herzen.

From what Freiligrath told me yesterday, it would appear that, before his departure for Manchester, Kinkel had been grovelling with renewed zeal before a crowd of CITY ALDERMEN, merchants, etc., in his role of fund-raiser, rhetorician and lesson-giver.

[^1]: a Wingham - b K. Marx, 'The Trials at Cologne. To the Editor of The Morning Advertiser'. - c swindle - d 29 October - e swindler



