---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "121. Marx to Engels. 4 November "
Page_Range: "269-270"
---

# 121. Marx to Engels. 4 November 



**[p. 236]**

Don't forget to send me the last bit for Dana.a Parliament assembles on Thursday.b The article is already somewhat out-of- date. But after Friday it will be completely worthless.

Kind regards to Weerth and Strohn.

Your

K. M. The merchant, Fleury, further testifies that, almost every week, Willich extorts pounds from him and his English friends on the plea that he needs this for the refugees. Now, it can be proved that Willich-Kinkel rudely turn away all refugees with the remark that they have not a centime to spare for such purposes. Willich tells them that he hasn't enough himself for his daily bread; Kinkel points with emotion to his children, and at most gives away a waistcoat cast off by the late Julius, the absent Schurz or his own august person.

121

London, 4 November 1852 (?) Dear Engels,

I am having to dictate these few lines to you today since the perfidious haemorrhoids will not let me sit down.

[^1]: First published considerably abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin,

[^2]: 1929

[^3]: MARX TO ENGELS0

[^4]: IN MANCHESTER

[^5]: a K. Marx, 'Attempts to Form a New Opposition Party'. - b 4 November - c The letter is written in Mrs Marx's hand. Marx himself inserted only the year with a question mark and signed the letter.

[^6]: Printed according to the original

[^7]: Published in English for the first time



