---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "122. Engels to Marx. 5- 6 November "
Page_Range: "270-274"
---

# 122. Engels to Marx. 5- 6 November 

As you see, Szemere wants to have his manuscript3 back. Vehse told me yesterday that Weerth had arranged an appointment with him in London but had got the date wrong: I duly explained things to him.

Your

K. M.

[From Mrs Marx]

Warm regards from the secretary, Marx's spouse. Kossuth is furious with Marx for having told Dana about his DODGE with Bonaparte, Vetter, etc.; Dana has made this material into a fulminating article.11

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time

122

ENGELS TO MARX

Dear Marx,

I am glad to hear that I am not the only sufferer. Strohn was here yesterday and the day before which, of course, meant some hard drinking; he left at three this morning and will have sailed today, I hope. For me this was the coup de grâce and means that today I shall be no good at all. For the same reason you won't get a translation today, not that it matters, since there's bound to be some steamer or other from Southampton which the thingd can go by and there certainly won't be even a Speech from the Throne in Parliament before the 11th.

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Manchester, 5-6 November,] 1852,c Friday

[^3]: a B. Szemere, Graf Ludwig Batthyâny, Arthur Görgei, Ludwig Kossuth - b K. Marx, 'Movements of Mazzini and Kossuth.—League with Louis Napoleon.— Palmerston'. - c The year was added later by Engels. - d K. Marx, 'Attempts to Form a New Opposition Party'.





**[p. 238]**

Or are the annals of history to read thus: 'In May 1851, at the time the Crystal Palace290 was opened in London, the tailor Nothjung travelled from Berlin to Leipzig in order to overthrow the Prussian constitution and start a civil war.' In any case, the minute book has been set aside and, from Strohn's account, some of the jurymen are quite decent, namely v. Rath, v. Bianca, Leven, Leiden, Herstadt and one other.

I also believe that, in view of the way the case is turning out, we ought at all costs to publish something. But it would be advisable, if not essential, for Schneider and one of the accused to come over to London after the trial, in which case I should arrange to come up there for a Saturday and Sunday. Then, when all has been discussed, you could go back with me and the manuscript could be ready within a few days. Meanwhile, write to old Ebner, asking

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 225-26. - b Engels refers to the words 'the most resolute Communists made the most courageous soldiers' in his work The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution (see present edition, Vol. 10, p. 226). - c under suspicion of suspected civic disloyalty - d the Communist League - e Göbel - f The Manifesto of the Cologne Central Authority of the Communist League of 1 December 1850 drawn up by Bürgers and others. The text of the Manifesto was confiscated during the arrest of the Communist League members and published in the Dresdner Journal und Anzeiger, No. 171, 22 June and the Kölnische Zeitung, No. 150, 24 June 1851.





**[p. 239]**

As for Bangya, the most immediate case against him necessarily falls to the ground if it is established that he did not address the last letter but one to Kothes.a I was completely flabbergasted when Dronke said in his letter that it was Bangya who had addressed the last letter but one, i.e. the last letter to have arrived safely. How did the fiévreuseh little man come to invent such a story? But the Collmann business looks fishy too.288 This letter of Collmann's is written in exactly the same hand as the earlier ones from Eisermannc; I shall send it back to you tomorrow, but it seems to me that we ought to hold on to it. Il y a là un faux? Before long we shall know through Weerth what is the matter with Collmanne; in the meantime you should ask Bangya to explain how Mr Collmann comes to be writing under a false name, etc., and why 'the man', and what man, died, and how it is that he has now suddenly come to life again. And find out from Mr Bangya the name of 'the commission agent' in London whom he 'knows' according to one of the letters. And, so that Dronke may also have something to do, get him to make inquiries with a German bookseller about Collmann.

It is most odd that all the letters should arrive by carrier; there's never a postmark on them, and their tone is always so perfunctory and nonchalant that one can't help smelling a rat. This one again has been written from 'a friend's at an inn'. None of this seems at all BUSINESSLIKE, any more than does the absurd evasion that it is his business when the manuscript' should be published. Enough. Even if in this instance Bangya is acting as honourably as can be expected of a mendacious Slav, it nevertheless seems to me that his friend in Berlin is an archscoundrel. Now, however, everything should be cleared up since Mr C. figures here as the immediate owner of the manuscript, and also as publisher. If there is no bookseller of this name, that clinches the matter.

Anyway, the notion that a publisher can leave a manuscript lying in his drawer for years is a novel one and hardly smacks of the book-trade. To my mind, that story about the children's books is also a DODGE; in England such muck never comes out at Christmas time. Moreover, it is written in such a vague and disjointed way

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 216 and 232. - b feverish - c See this volume, pp. 237 and 256. - d There's a forgery there. - e See this volume, pp. 251-52. - f K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile.





**[p. 240]**

However, J myself can't possibly write to Bangya at this point, since I have no details of what happened between you and him, what he said to you, what other letters he may have shown you, etc. But we've got him now.

Saturday, 6 November

For physical reasons I did not manage to send off the foregoing yesterday. Since then I have read another 'Stieberiad' in the

Kölnische Zeitung.b So the original minute-book has been dropped and in its stead H. Liebknecht has risen from the dead in the shape of a cash receipt. Monsieur Hirsch and company—for there must be a number of them—seem to have well and truly done the stupid Prussian police out of a lot of money. // valait bien la peine,c

their sending a police lieutenantd to London merely to find themselves imposed upon in this manner and, on top of that, fobbed off with the information about the most secret meeting at your house.291

But what is all this about Dronke's friend, Fleury, whom we here find openly and unequivocally described as a police spy? This will deflect some of the little man's wrath from Bangya. It would also seem that someone has blabbed about Stieber's letter, not that it matters; the way Stieber himself is drawing attention to this document and speaking of 'infamous calumnies' can only serve to enhance its effect.

Weerth is in Liverpool and will not be back for several hours so that I shall have to hold on to the letters from Schneider and Bangyae until tomorrow.

That, of course, is enough to send him to the gallows. I've never heard anything like it before.

[^1]: 'By his own admission, Bürgers worked for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung' .l

[^2]: a Anyway, we shall see. - b 'Assisen-Procedur gegen D. Herrn. Becker und Genossen. Anklage wegen hochverrätherischen Complottes', Kölnische Zeitung, No. 283, 4 November 1852. - c It was hardly worth the trouble. - d Goldheim - e See this volume, p. 237. - f 'Assisen-Procedur gegen D. Herrn. Becker und Genossen'



