---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "123. Marx to Engels. 10 November "
Page_Range: "274-279"
---

# 123. Marx to Engels. 10 November 



**[p. 241]**

Your

F. E.

Don't forget to send me by return copies of Freiligrath's poems about Kinkel.3 We have already people in Bradford who want to ask him to read them aloud.

Hirsch must still be here, at least, he was positivement6 here last week, for I saw him at the Athenaeum.244 Another chap who is the spit image of him was here as well and this confused me at first. Perhaps he has a post here, or is looking for one? By the way, when you were last here292 we met a fellow once in Broughton who cried 'Good morning, Marx', and we couldn't place him. It was Hirsch! So the fellow goes 'on tour'. As soon as the trial is over, he must be given a good drubbing.

First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t l m e

123

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 10 November 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Enclosed my wife's reportc on yesterday's Robert Blum meet- ing.293 She was with Imandt in the gallery of the Freemason's Tavern where it was held.

[^1]: 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer', I and II. - b positively - c [Jenny Marx,] 'Der Volksbund für zerschiedene Welten in Poesie', Philadelphier Demokrat, 1 December 1852.





**[p. 242]**

Now for the Cologne affair. Had I been in Bürgers' etc. place, I should never have allowed Mr Becker0 to flaunt himself so brazenly and at the expense of everyone else as l'homme supérieur? or to debase as he did the character of the whole proceedings, much to the delight of the democrats. To defend oneself is one thing but quite another to deliver an apologia for oneself at others' expense. Becker is one of the revolution's epigones, possessed of a great deal of cunning but little intelligence and well able to calculate just how he can trick his way up to become a great man. His talents remain those d'un infiniment petit."

As you already know, the government has, out of sheer desperation, resorted to heroic means, namely Goldheim's retro- spective report,291 only to find itself once again ensnared.

Goldheim's testimony furnished 2 data: 'Greif and 'Fleury'. I therefore instituted inquiries about Greif (to which end I myself engaged a Prussian informer). In this way I obtained his address and found out that he lived at 17 Victoria Road, Kensington. This, however, is Mr Fleury's house. Hence it was established that Greif lives with Fleury. It further transpired that Greifs official position here is not that of 'police lieutenant' but of attaché to the Prussian

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 232. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - c Hermann Becker - d the superior man - e of an infinitely small one





**[p. I]**

So much was now clear: Greif was Fleury's superior and Fleury Hirsch's superior. And so, indeed, it has turned out.

On the other hand, Imandt and Dronke called on Fleury on Friday, 5 November, Kölnische Zeitung in hand. He, of course, feigned surprise, said he knew no one by the name of Greif, expressed his readiness to make any statement in the presence of a magistrate, but first wanted to consult his lawyer, made two appointments for Saturday, 6 November, one for 2 and the other for 4 o'clock, but took good care not to turn up and so gained for the police one more day on which we were unable to operate, apart from sending a few preliminary letters to Cologne. Finally, on Sunday, 7 November, Dronke and Imandt extracted from him a statement which you will see in the Kölnische?96 I shall send you a copy but cannot at this moment lay hands on it. Having his statement safely in their pockets, they told him he was a spy, that Greif was living at his place, that we had known all about it and had been hoodwinking the police, whereas they had believed they were hoodwinking us. He, of course, continued to protest his innocence.

Finally I sent round some fellows (among them the tipsy General Herweg) to track down Hirsch's lodgings. It transpired that he also lived in Kensington, not far from Fleury.

One more thing before I go on. The whole of Goldheim's testimony becomes perfectly explicable if you consider that, 1. Goldheim was here on 30 October (Saturday) and, in company with Alberts, secretary at the Prussian Embassy, went to see Greif and Fleury; 2. that on the morning of that same 30 October our statement about the forthcoming revelations3 appeared in 5 English papers; 3. that Fleury had arranged a rendez-vous with Imandt and Dronke for that same 30 October because Dronke was to take over French lesson for him instead of Imandt. 4. But that before Stieber made the revelations about London at his 2nd interrogation and immediately after his first interrogation on the subject of Cherval, etc., I had sent to the Kölnische Zeitung, the Frankfurter Journal and the National-Zeitung, a statement in which Stieber was already threatened with the disclosure of his letter to me.b Admittedly this

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Public Statement to the Editors of the English Press'. - b See this volume, pp. 225-26.





**[p. 244]**

This provides a highly prosaic explanation for Stieber's 'clair- voyance' and the omniscience of his police agents in London. Everything else Goldheim said was Jabulae.* I have conveyed such information as is necessary about these things to Cologne by diverse channels, together with Fleury's statement.b

But the best is yet to come. It was, of course, my intention to take out a WARRANT against Hirsch, for which purpose I made inquiries about his lodgings. But it was not till Saturday that I obtained the address. I felt sure that, if I could get the WARRANT against Hirsch, he would implicate Fleury, and Fleury Greif.

What happens? On Friday Willich, very secretively, betakes himself with Hirsch to the court in Bow Street where, in Schärttner's presence, he obtains from Hirsch what is purported to be a written confession in triplicate stating that some six months ago he and Fleury fabricated the spurious minutes, he then sends off the 3 documents, 1. to Göbel, the presiding judge at the Assizes, 2. to Schneider, 3. to the Kölnische Zeitung—and gives Hirsch the money to escape, indeed, even has him accompanied to the steamer, ostensibly so that he can confess in person in Cologne.

We all only heard of this through the inquiry we had set on foot about Hirsch, and partly, too, at Bow Street, where we went to take out the WARRANT. Schapper himself told Liebknecht that Willich had breathed not a word to him of all this. Thus, our intention of initiating proceedings of our own in London was thwarted by Mr Willich's sleight of hand. To what end? The answer is very simple if we reflect that for the past year he has been the merchant Fleury's homme entretenu0 and that in any case, therefore, some highly compromising things must have emerged had we had Fleury apprehended.

An instance, by the by, of the high esteem in which this man Fleury (I have never set eyes on him) is held by the democrats— Techow, leaving for Australia and already on board ship, wrote him a letter in which he commended him for having both heart and head in the right place.

The money Hirsch was given for his journey by Willich had undoubtedly been handed to the latter for this purpose by Fleury.

Hirsch has admitted that he tried to copy Liebknecht's writing and that he was working under the direction of the merchant Fleury (this cur is, besides, a man of substance and has married into

[^1]: a fabrication - b See this volume, p. 235. - c kept man



To my mind there is no doubt that the Cologne accused will all, without exception, be acquitted.

I should be grateful if you could write and tell Strohn that he would greatly oblige me if he could send me a few pounds forthwith. Of the £4.10/- received through you, nearly £3 has been spent on errands, informers, etc. Our impoverished League friends naturally took advantage of the many errands, appoint- ments, etc., to tot up pretty substantial faux frais de production3

for beer, cigars, omnibuses, etc., which I, of course, had to make good.

You will be receiving Freiligrath's poems.b

Apropos, Reichenbach has issued a 'Lithographed Statement'299 to all American papers in which a dirty trick is played on Willich-Kinkel. It discloses that Kinkel claimed, inter alia, £200 for his journey alone. I shall get hold of the document and let you have it for the archives.216

Your

K. M.

Greetings to Weerth. Vehse left yesterday. Have already written to Frankfurt about our pamphlet.300 Unless we write something, Becker will seize upon all this business ad majorem

[^1]: gloriam Beckeri.0

[^2]: First published considerably abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin,

[^3]: 1929

[^4]: a false expenses - b F. Freiligrath, 'An Joseph Weydemeyer', I and II. - c to the greater glory of Becker

[^5]: Printed according to the original

[^6]: Published in English for the first time



