---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "124. Marx to Engels. 16 November "
Page_Range: "279-280"
---

# 124. Marx to Engels. 16 November 



**[p. 124]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 16 November 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

If you can, do a Tribune article on the Cologne affaira for Friday. You are now as familiar with all the material as myself and, for the past 4-5 weeks I have so neglected my domestic pother for the sake of PUBLIC BUSINESS that, with the best will in the world, I shall not be able to get down to work this week.

You haven't told me whether you received the Reichenbach circular299 sent off to you last week.

This evening we are to discuss a statement for the English Press on the Cologne affair.b There will hardly be time to send it for you to see beforehand. However, if you could do one to reach me by Thursday morning,0 that would be even better.

Regards to Weerth.

Your

K. M.

At the Ruge meeting293 on the 9th, messages were received from Kossuth-Mazzini pleading sickness. However, on the 10th they put in an appearance at the 'Friends of Italy'.301 Ledru did not make his excuses at all.

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engeb und „ . , . . , . „ , . , „ K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published m English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t l m e

[^2]: 1929

[^3]: a F. Engels, 'The Late Trial at Cologne'. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, 'A Final Declaration on the Late Cologne Trials'. - c 18 November



