---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "125. Marx to Engels. 19 November "
Page_Range: "280-281"
---

# 125. Marx to Engels. 19 November 



**[p. 125]**

MARX TO ENGELS302

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 November 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Last Wednesday,a at my suggestion, the League here b disbanded; similarly the continued existence of the League on the Continent was declared to be no longer expedient. In any case, since the arrest of Bürgers-Röser, it had to all intents and purposes already ceased to exist there. Enclosed a statement for the English papers,0 to complement our first one.d You should, however, put it into better and CONCISER English. I no longer have the German original.6303 In addition I am writing for a lithographed article a detailed account of the dirty tricks played by the police,' and also an appeal to America for money for the prisoners and their families. Treasurer Freiligrath. Signed by all our people.304

The article for the Tribune? however, is dependent on the time at your disposal. You must return the enclosed statement, or rather an amended version of the same, as soon as possible, since not a day longer is to be lost where the London press is concerned.

Regards to Weerth.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in part in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the author's Ergänzungshefte, No. 12, 12 April, Stutt- copy in a notebook for 1860 gart, 1922 and in full in: Karl . Marx/Friedrich Engels, Briefwechsel, Bd. 1, Published in English for the first Moskau-Leningrad, 1935 u m e

[^2]: a 17 November - b the London District of the Communist League - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'A Final Declaration on the Late Cologne Trials'. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Public Statement to the Editors of the English Press'. - e K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Erklärung', London, 18 November 1852, New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 39, 10 December 1852. - f K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - I F. Engels, 'The Late Trial at Cologne'.



