---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "128. Engels to Marx. 29 November "
Page_Range: "285-287"
---

# 128. Engels to Marx. 29 November 



**[p. 252]**

Warmest regards to your wife and children. I shall be in London in somewhat over a fortnight.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

128

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, Monday, 29 November 1852

Dear Marx,

I've been toiling over the enclosed articled until one o'clock in the morning, but another post goes at 9 a.m. I'll try it as an experiment and see whether you get it in time for the STEAMER (Tuesday evening per first MAIL to Liverpool); if not, you'll have to send it by Friday's steamer.

Tomorrow I have to go out of town. If I'm back early enough I shall send you some money.

Shall I be getting an article on England for the Tribune soon? I am now able to work again.

Cobden seems to have been disappointed in the ministerial hopes

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 239. - b It looks as though they have been trying to hoodwink us after all. - c A pun on Schultz—the name and Polizeischuh—a police official. - d F. Engels, 'The Late Trial at Cologne'.





**[p. 253]**

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, , , . , , . ,. , r 1013 Published m English tor the tirst time

[^2]: a R. Cobden, [Speech in the House of Commons on 26 November 1852,] The Times, No. 21284, 27 November 1852.



