---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "129. Marx to Karl Eduard Vehse. End of November "
Page_Range: "287-288"
---

# 129. Marx to Karl Eduard Vehse. End of November 



**[p. 129]**

MARX TO KARL EDUARD VEHSE

IN DRESDEN

[Rough copy]

[London, end of November 1852] Sir,

No doubt you thought it unusual that I, a stranger, should have written to you like an old friend.191 For this you must ascribe the blame to Weerth and Reinhardt. However, I realise that I was thoroughly mistaken. As an acquaintance of Campe's, that old usurer, parjure" and maid-wife-widower, you must have been aware that this individual is one of my mortal enemies, and hence you had no right to offer him my pamphlet,b thereby affording him the opportunity he desired of conveying his impertinences to me indirectly and at no risk to himself. I am not personally acquainted with the individual, although possessed of some specific information about him. The fact that I am engaged in a fight à mortc with the SHAM LIBERALS is enough to expose me to his intrigues which, il en peut être sûr,d I shall answer when the time is ripe.

In the second place you had no right whatever, upon receiving an inquiry from me, to write to Mr Bangya. So far as I am aware, it was I who introduced you to Mr Bangya, but in no sense did I present him as my confident in private matters. And it is strange to have Campe's insolence conveyed to me through a 3rd party whom Mr Campe—I have this on the authority of Weerth here and shall inform Bangya accordingly—declares to be a spy.

Should this letter cause you offence, you need only come to London; you know where I live and may be assured that you will always find me prepared to give you the satisfaction customary in such cases.

Dr K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a perjurer - b Apparently K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - c to the death - d he may be sure of it



