---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "130. Marx to Engels. 3 December "
Page_Range: "288-290"
---

# 130. Marx to Engels. 3 December 



**[p. 130]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 3 December 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

You would long ago have had an answer to your letter (enclosing the article for Danaa), had I not been occupied with the dictation of the final version of my pamphlet,b and then delayed by visits from Weerth, Strohn, Damm, etc.

In all probability the pamphlet will be printed in Switzerland by Schabelitz JUNIOR, who has left his old man and set up his own bookshop. Moreover, if Cluss thinks he can recoup the cost of production, he can have the thing printed in Washington. Printed it must be, if only so that it may be available as a public document after the outbreak of the revolution. I have made some further, very interesting discoveries about the Cherval conspiracy, etc., which I hope you will be reading in print.309

Weerth called on Sunday evening, and found me very busy^and not in the best of moods. He asked me 'what did I propose, actually, to write about the Cologne affair?'—and this in somewhat superior, nasal tones. I asked 'what did he propose to do in the West Indies?' and, after a quarter of an hour or so, he made off. On Tuesday evening he reappeared and said he. had not wished to come back, actually, but had yielded to Freiligrath's insistence. For on Sunday I had seemed to him very busy and out of temper. I took the liberty of pointing out to Mr Weerth that, for 9/10ths of the time I had known him, he had always been out of temper and MALCONTENT, which was something he couldn't say of me. After I had given him a piece of my mind, he pulled himself together and became ..the old Weerth again. He seems to me to have become damned bourgeoisified and to be taking his career too much 'au sérieux'.c Strohn at least is the same as ever, and pas trop fin?

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'The Late Trial at Cologne'. - b K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - c seriously - d not too clever

[^2]: 10»





**[p. 256]**

'Engels has not written to the address indicated by you for, as he points out, what is actually proved by an answer to a letter that is sent not direct but only poste restante, through the medium of a second address?

'Instead, Engels asked some business friends in Berlin to make inquiries. After the most painstaking investigations they now tell him that:

'1. no such firm as Collmann exists. '2. no such person as Collmann exists at the address indicated, 58 or 59 Neue Königsstr.

'3. no one at all by the name of Collmann is to be found in Berlin.

'Engels further draws my attention to the fact that the two letters signed Eisermann and the letter signed Collmann were written by the same hand, that all 3 possess the unusual quality of being loose bits of paper bearing no postmark, that in the first two Eisermann, and in the third Collmann, figures directly as publisher, etc., and that on pretexts that are mutually incompatible the thing has been allowed to drag on for nearly 7 months.310

'Now that Collmann has proved to be as much of an illusion as was previously the non-existent publisher of the Constitutionelle Zeitung Eisermann, I ask you yourself, how can all these contradictions, improbabilities and mysteries over something so simple as the publication of a pamphletc be rationally explained?

' "Trust" will not conjure away facts, nor do people who respect one another demand unquestioning faith of one another.

'I confess that, the more I turn this matter over in my mind, the more I am compelled, even with the best will in the world, to find it damned obscure; also that, were it not for my feelings of friendship towards you, I would unhesitatingly echo Engels' concluding remark: "Après tout il paraît pourtant qu'on a voulu nous jouer." d

Yours etc.,

Marx

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 257-58. - b ibid., p. 252. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, The

[^2]: Great Men of the Exile. - d 'It looks as though they have been trying to hoodwink us after all.'



