---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "131. Marx to Jânos Bangya. 3 December "
Page_Range: "290-292"
---

# 131. Marx to Jânos Bangya. 3 December 



**[p. 257]**

Tomorrow we shall see what reply comes from Mr Bangya. Bonaparte is spending some glorious months honeymooning with his empire. The fellow has always lived on tick. Simply make loan institutions in France as universal and as accessible as possible to all classes of Frenchmen—and the whole world will believe that the millennium is here. On top of that, a bank of one's own, no less, for STOCKJOBBERY and RAILWAY HUMBUG.312 The fellow never changes. Not for one moment does the chevalier d'industrie3 deny the pretender, or vice versa. If he doesn't go to war and that right soon, he'll founder on his finances. How good that Proudhon's plans for salvation should find realisation in the only form in which they are practicable—that of the credit racket and more or less barefaced fraud.

I am looking forward very much to your arrival here.313

Your

K. Marx

First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t l m e

131

MARX TO JÂNOS BANGYA

London, 3 December 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Bangya,

Engels has not written to the address indicated by you for, as he points out, what is actually proved by an answer to a letter that is

[^1]: 1929

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Rough copy]

[^4]: I have today received from Engels a letter containing some highly curious pieces of information.15

[^5]: a swindler - b See this volume, p. 252.





**[p. 258]**

Instead, Engels asked some business friends in Berlin to make inquiries. After the most painstaking investigations they now tell him that:

1. no such firm as Collmann exists; 2. no Collmann exists at the address indicated, 58 or 59 Neue Königsstr. and

3. no one at all by the name of Collmann is to be found in Berlin.

Engels further draws my attention to the fact that the two letters signed Eisermann and the letter signed Collmann were written by the same hand, that all 3 possess the unusual quality of being loose bits of paper bearing no postmark, that in the first 2 Eisermann, and in the 3rd Collmann, figures directly as publisher, etc., and that on pretexts that are mutually incompatible the thing has been allowed to drag on for nearly 7 months. Now that Collmann has proved to be as much of an illusion as was previously the non-existent publisher of the Constitutionelle Zeitung, Eisermann, I ask you yourself, how can all these contradictions, improbabilities and mysteries over something so simple as the publication of a pamphlet be rationally explained?

'Trust' will not dispose of facts, nor do people who respect one another demand unquestioning faith of one another.

I confess that, the more I turn this matter over in my mind, the more I am compelled, even with the best will in the world, to find it damned obscure; also that, were it not for my feelings of friendship towards you, I would unhesitatingly echo Engels' concluding remark: Après tout il paraît pourtant qu'on a voulu nous jouer."1

Yours ever,

K. Marx P.S. Engels finally draws my attention to the fact that, even were the manuscript in question to reappear for a few days in London,511 absolutely nothing would be proved and nothing gained. What could it prove, save the existence and identity of the manuscript, of which nobody is in doubt.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1929

[^2]: Published in English for the first time a 'It looks as though they have been trying to hoodwink us after all.'



