---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "135. Marx to Gustav Zerffi. 28 December "
Page_Range: "300-304"
---

# 135. Marx to Gustav Zerffi. 28 December 



**[p. 267]**

Ad vocem Goegg. Goegg, who for months was telling everyone that he attended the Wheeling Congress,245 was in Strassburg at the time, getting together what remained of his fortune, £300. Now, in company with Ronge, he is setting up kindergartens and similar German-Catholic227 educational establishments.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Published according to the letter Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, from Cluss to Weydemeyer of Moscow, 1934 6-7 January 1853

Published in English for the first time

135

MARX TO GUSTAV ZERFFI

London, 28 December 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Friend,

Sincerest thanks for your letter. There were two circumstances which enabled Bangya to hoodwink me for so long. Firstly, his acquaintanceship with Szemere, whom I instantly recognised as l'esprit fort" of Hungary from his manuscript on Görgey, Kossudi, etc.,b also,, your friendship with Bangya, since you inspired me with complete

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: a brains - *> B. Szemere, Graf Ludwig Batthyâny, Arthur Görgei, Ludwig Kossuth





**[p. 268]**

At this very moment I am still inclined to believe that he is not a true spy; rather, as you rightly say, his function as 'intermediary" between the various parties and as political match-maker has led him into dubious ways.

But first a point that is of particular concern to yourself. Szirmay is certainly an agent of Kossuth's. His mission, or so I have gathered from some unguarded remarks, is to establish contact with Bonaparte through Mr de Maupas. A short time previously Kossuth had tried to raise a loan of 1 V2 million from the Orleanists through the agency of Bangya and Malingre, his correspondent in Paris, but had met with a rebuff.

To return to Bangya. I have with my own eyes seen a commission made out by Kossuth and countersigned by Szirmay, by which Bangya is appointed prefect of police in partibus, as it were, by Kossuth—as chief of an anti-government counterpolice force. On the one hand, my fears over otherwise suspect contacts and acquaintanceships of Bangya's were allayed by this commission, for it gave them an air of being official connections which, if exploited with skill, could be of use to our party; thus I myself have obtained from him some details of importance concerning the Prussian government. On the other hand, I asked him outright: 'How can you reconcile your relationship with Kossuth and your relationship with Szemere?' He replied very candidly that firstly he was acting in Szemere's interest,, and then the latter had authorised his relationship with Kossuth. I therefore never again alluded to the subject.

Bangya several times invited me on Kossuth's behalf to visit the latter. I replied that I lived at such and such a place and that, if Mr Kossuth wished to speak to me, he need only take the trouble of coming to see me. Kossuth then suggested that we should meet on neutral ground.3 I left the matter pending. In the meantime, however, an article of mine appeared anonymously in the Tribune (New York), in which I attacked Kossuth, Mazzini, etc., with especial reference to the intrigues in Paris conducted through Kiss, etc.b Frightful hullabaloo in the American Press! Kossuth

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 261. - b K. Marx, 'Movements of Mazzini and Kossuth.— League with Louis Napoleon.—Palmerston'.





**[p. 269]**

Kossuth replied, through Szirmay, 1. that he knew nothing about the statement, 2. that he had no private secretary, and repeated his invitation, which I ignored, to meet him on neutral ground. I, for my part, published in the Tribune Kossuth's statement to me,b

and there, for the time being, the matter rests, although the entire inept and insipid German-American press is still buzzing with it. Nevertheless, the storm of indignation evoked by his article against me shows that Kossuth will be perduc the moment the fact of his alliance with Bonaparte is established.

I am now wholly of the opinion that we should both of us observe the utmost discretion for, as soon as Bangya knows that we have seen through him, he could do you and Szemere harm, perhaps considerable harm, particularly as regards your remaining in Paris. Moreover, were Bangya to be in any way publicly unmasked before the manuscriptd appears, it could at best only make me look ridiculous. Finally, I believe it is important—until the point has been reached at which we can publicly unmask him—that a close watch be kept on Mr Bangya. This is particularly important while he remains in Paris. He is astounding- ly indiscreet and, if only to retain your confidence, will keep you and Szemere informed of every move made by the various parties he serves.

My attitude towards him, therefore, will be cool and reserved— as he can only expect after his latest coup—but I shall not let him know either the full extent of my suspicion or that I am 'secretly' corresponding with you.

Bangya himself, in the note enclosed in his anonymous friend's letter, writes:

[^1]: 'I think you are now at liberty to have the work published elsewhere.'

[^2]: a A reference to 1 Kings 12:11. - b K. Marx, 'A Reply to Kossuth's "Secretary"'. - c lost - d K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile.





**[p. 270]**

However, I fully agree with Szemere and yourself that it is high time this was done. The only difficulty lies in the execution. A pamphlet of mine, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne has just been brought out by a Swiss bookseller.325 (I shall arrange for 2 copies to be sent to you and Szemere as soon as possible.) This same bookseller is busy with an edition of my 18th Brumaire for Germany.326 There is no prospect of inducing him to embark on a third undertaking. No bookseller in Germany now dares to publish anything of mine. Hence my only recourse would be to print it at my own expense, which, in my present cir- cumstances, is impossible. And yet the thing is vital. I shall consider what can be done.

You will see from the Revelations that Greif is a thoroughly infamous creature. In December 1851 he visited Paris in connection with the Franco-German plot143 and in order to establish a spurious connection between my friends in Cologne and the idiots in Paris.327

However, it is true that, while Greif was still here in London, Bangya received money from Berlin regularly on the 3rd or 4th of each month. Do you know from what sources he is drawing this money?

Our watchword in this business should be: 'à Corsaire Corsaire et demi'}' Should Bangya show signs of becoming 'dangerous', all we have to do is remind him that his connections with Malingre and the Orleanists have placed him at our mercy.

Write soon, and assure Szemere that in me he has a sincere admirer.

Yours

[^1]: Ch. Williams0

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a See this volume, pp. 257-58. - b Set a thief to catch a thief. - c Marx's pseudonym



