---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "137. Marx to Engels. 21 January "
Page_Range: "305-306"
---

# 137. Marx to Engels. 21 January 



**[p. 272]**

In the spring or early summer I shall again come up to London. Hasn't that thingc arrived from Schabelitz yet? Warm regards to your wife and children and to the tipsy crew likewise.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin 1929 t l m e

137

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 21 January 1853

Dear Engels,

If at all possible, kindly translate the whole of the enclosed d and send it off direct from Manchester (signing it with my name) via Liverpool or Southampton, depending on sailings, to 'A. Dana, One of the Editors of the "New-York Tribune", New York'.

This is how matters stand: Now that our misfortunes here have reached a CLIMAX, I have drawn £20 on Greeley for 10 articles (including the enclosed) and have written, telling him that the copyist has not quite finished copying the article (which must therefore be dated Friday), and that it will be sent off to him on Tuesday. I have charged him £2 per article, which is what Dana promised in his letter of 16 December

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a more or less - b Marie Blank - c K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see this volume, p. 264). - d K. Marx, 'Elections.—Financial Clouds.—The Duchess of Sutherland and Slavery'.



