---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "138. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 21 January "
Page_Range: "306-307"
---

# 138. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 21 January 



**[p. 273]**

LETTERS).3

The little Jew Bamberger has not yet given me a centime but I have his promise and shall by degrees extract at least £15 from him against the bill (pending its arrival).

Now that we are charging £2, the above article must be sent off in its entirety. The piece about the Duchess of Sutherland will cause an uproar in America.

Apropos, Blind has already dunned me twice for Herzen's book.3 So you must return it to me.

It is 2 o'clock in the morning. Hence I cannot now have this letter STAMPED, and must send it off unstamped.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, , • • • • • ,. r- Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MECA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

138

[London,] 21 January 1853

 Yesterday I read a letter from Heinzen to Bamberger. He complains of money troubles and says he has been forced to resign from the Janus. As regards Dr Kellner, he was for a time correspondent of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. You should see if you can't make contact with him d'une manière ou d'une autre}1 Once Weydemeyer has put out feelers, your first step might be to send him a 'pithy' article The wretched Willich, who is done for here, sailed for America last week as Kinkel's agent; so it is important that at least those parts of the pamphlet0 which relate to him should appear in the press. It would be best if you could arrange

[^1]: MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS329

[^2]: IN WASHINGTON

[^3]: a A. Herzen, Du développement des idées révolutionnaires en Russie. - b in one way or another - c K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.



