---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "139. Marx to Engels. 29 January "
Page_Range: "307-310"
---

# 139. Marx to Engels. 29 January 



**[p. 274]**

Börnstein, who wants to catch us with 'his bait', also be of some use in this matter? From what I know of him and his compagnon" Bernays, they will be much tickled by the account of the trickery of the police. I think it politic to establish contact with these people. I can assure you that if Bernays finds the means—and we must provide him with it—to re-establish contact with us, I could have these two chaps eating out of my hand. Have you heard nothing more from Schrammh or, on the other side, from Teilering}

First published in Marx and Engels, Printed according to the letter Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, from Cluss to Weydemeyer of Moscow, 1962 17 February 1853

Published in English for the first time

139

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 29 January 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Have received the £3 and the manuscript you returned. You must excuse me for not having written for so long, the explanation being PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT.

About a fortnight ago Willich pushed off to America as Kinkel's agent.

Mrs von Brüningk was buried a few days since. As a result of clumsy manoeuvring by the Parliamentarians Reichenbach and Löwe, and negligence on Imandt's part, the £1,000 have again fallen into the hands of Mr Kinkel in the sense that the money has been deposited in the Bank of England in his name and Reichenbach is to hand over the certificate of deposit to him in May, unless the guarantors should decide otherwise. Such decisions are, of course, now quite worthless.

[^1]: a companion - b Conrad Schramm





**[p. 275]**

Schabelitz did not have the pamphlet a ready until 11 January. About 6 sheets. But he seems unwilling to send anything to London until the thing has been successfully dispatched to every part of Germany and receipt acknowledged.

T h e gentlemen in Cologne, notably Daniels, persist in maintain- ing a dignified silence. T h e answer to our having subordinated all business to their affair for the space of 4-5 weeks.

In the enclosed cutting from the Arbeiterrepublikb (editor Weitling) you will see the venom which this tailor king and dictator of the 'Communia' colony330 expends upon the communist trial in Cologne and the Marx party and Co.

Yesterday I ventured for the first time to write an article in English for Dana.c Pieper made some corrections and, once I have a good grammar and write away gamely, I should d o passablement6

well.

Two apropos:

D'abord? Blind is incessantly dunning me for Herzen's book/ Second: Don't forget to enclose in your next Reichenbach's circular and his statement of accounts.299 Dronke needs it to establish himself as a new correspondent^

[^1]: T h e state ef the winter crops being what it is, I feel convinced that the crisis WILL BECOME DUE. SO long as the STAPLE ARTICLE, FOOD, remains tolerably ABUNDANT and cheap, and what with Australia, etc., the thing could have been a long time in coming. Now a STOP will be put to all that. Incidentally, is it not somewhat unusual to find e.g. The Economist vindicating the Bank of England's most recent DISCOUNT REGULATION, on the ground that its purpose is 'TO PREVENT THE EXPORTATION OF CAPITAL' ? We know very well what is intended. But could one not trouble one's FREE TRADER'S conscience by asking: Do you also wish to PREVENT 'EXPORTATION OF CAPITAL' in the form of COTTONS, YARNS, etc.? Why, then, in the form OF GOLD? IS the FREE-TRADE ECONOMY destined to revert to MERCANTILISM pure and simple and regard the EFFLUX and INFLUX OF GOLD as the nervus rerum'7

[^2]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - b 'Schlußbemerkung zum Kölner Kommunistenprozeß', Republik der Arbeiter, No. 52, 25 December 1852. - c K. Marx, 'Capital Punishment.— Mr. Cobden's Pamphlet.—Regulations of the Bank of England'. - d passably - e Firstly. - f A. Herzen, Du développement des idées révolutionnaires en Russie. - s See this volume, p. 282. - h 'The Bank of England and the Rate of Discount', The Economist, No. 491, 22 January 1853. - ' prime mover



What is the effect of a bad harvest on an incipient war? Let me know, too, what the position is in the MANUFACTURING DEPARTMENT, particularly in cotton.

Jones' paper 0 is again en ascendant? Cobden's pamphlet c and the MANCHESTER PEACE CONFERENCE 332 are, I feel, utterly nonsensical at the present time. So now you know, says Palmerston's journal, The Morning Post, these bourgeois parvenus are totally incapable of governing a country; that's a thing only the aristocracy can do.f The Morning Herald publishes a letter addressed to itself and written, or so it asserts, at Bonaparte's own dictation, in which the latter says he would come to England only if the QUEEN needed 200,000 of his 'heroes of order' to combat the perilous growth of democracy. Which democracy, says the Herald, is you, Mr Cobden, you and associates.

Concerning The Times, I have been given the following, fairly reliable, particulars which may be of interest to you:

[^1]: Mr Walter, MP for Nottingham, is still the PAPER'S constitutional monarch, still its PRINCIPAL SHAREHOLDER. Mr Mowbray Morris is The Timers LORD OF EXCHEQUER, its FINANCIAL AND POLITICAL MANAGER—a very adventurous and 'RECKLESS' FELLOW. Mr Delane JUNIOR (a friend of Disraeli's) is SECRETARY FOR THE HOME OFFICE. His father is EDITOR OF THE Morning Chronicle. Mr Dosent is SECRETARY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS. In

[^2]: a [Speech of Napoleon III in the Senate on 22 January 1853 on the occasion of his marriage to Eugénie de Montijo,] Le Moniteur universel, No. 23, 23 January 1853. - b i.e. Napoleon III thus called after a character in Heine's satirical poem 'Zwei Ritter'. - c The People's Paper- d in the ascendant - e R. Cobden, 1793 and 1853. In Three Letters. - ' 'London, Friday, Jan. 28, 1853' (leader), The Morning Post, No. 24681, 28 January 1853; 'The Peace and Arbitration Conference', The Morning Post, No. 246,82, 29 January 1853.



