---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "142. Marx to Engels. 23 February "
Page_Range: "313-316"
---

# 142. Marx to Engels. 23 February 

Have you had the £3 I sent you last week—on Thursday or Friday?

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, „ , , . , , • r ,• , <• . r- 1913 Published in English tor the tirst time

142

MARX TO ENGELS338

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 23 February 1853

Dear Engels,

I have been sérieusement indisposed; for the 'perfidious Prus- sians' have not permitted me either to stand, sit or lie down. Hence my long silence and my failure so much as to acknowledge the money.

You will have seen that Kossuth, through an American filibuster, Captain Mayne Reid, has disavowed his alleged Milan proclamation.c339 Well, yesterday Szemere wrote to me from Paris, saying he knew for certain that the proclamation was authentic, as was evident in any case from its contents. The Leader (pro- Mazzini)

You will yourself have seen, in The Daily News, Delia Rocco's statemente aimed directly at Agostini, but also indirectly at

[^1]: * 'deems it his duty to caution his readers, that this affair lies entirely between Mr Kossuth and Mr Mazzini and that the latter is absent from England'.*d

[^2]: a we shall see - b seriously - c 'In the Name of the Hungarian Nation.—To the Soldiers Quartered in Italy (February 1853)', The Times, No. 21348, 10 February 1853. - d Cf. 'Kossuth and the Milan Revolt', The Leader, No. 152, 19 February 1853. - e Delia Rocco, 'Mazzini's Proclamation. (To the Editor of The Daily News)', The Daily News, No. 2107, 21 February 1853.





**[p. 281]**

You have rated Mazzini too high if you imagine he was present in person at Milan. At critical moments like these he absents himself from England so that he may be suspected of being in the theatre of war.

Pitiable finale though the Milan business is to Mazzini's eternal plotting, and despite my conviction that he has done himself personal injury, I am sure that the revolutionary movement as a whole will benefit by what is happening. I.e., by the brutal manner in which the Austrians are exploiting []. Had Radetzky followed Strassoldo's example, had he praised the Milanese citizenry for their 'orderly conduct', had he described the whole thing as the wretched uprising of a few 'MISCREANTS' and, as a token of his confidence, appeared to loosen the reins a little, the revolutionary party would have been discredited in the eyes of the whole world. But as it is, by introducing a system of wholesale plunder, he is turning Italy into the 'revolutionary crater' which Mazzini, for all his declaiming, was unable to conjure into existence.

And another thing. Could any one of us have believed that, after its 4 years of victory, military preparations and rodomontade, reaction should feel itself so infinitely weak that, at the first sign of a riot, it lets out a scream of genuine terror? The fellows' belief in revolution is unshakable. Once again they have testified to the whole world how insecure they feel. Whereas realiterh the 'emigration' is totally bankrupt and impotent, they loudly proclaim its power through all government papers and encourage the belief that a net of conspiracy is closing in from all sides on the worthy citizens.

Ad vocemc Bangya. Is presently in Paris. I now possess actual proof that the gallant fellow is an agent of the Austrian government. He bought his way back to France by accepting a clandestine post in the-French Police Ministry. At the same time he is in Paris as official agent for Kossuth, who wants money from Bonaparte. In Paris, by the by, the fellow has woven a net in which he himself will become ensnared. As to our manuscript,*1 he sold it to Greif, who was travelling under the name of 'Schulz'. Incidentally, both of them misled the government into believing that they had 'managed to procure'—note the professional term—this 'document' from the archives of a 'secret society'.

[^1]: a noble pair of brothers (Horace, Satires, II, 3) - b in reality - c re - d K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile.





**[p. 282]**

I have heard from a reliable source, mais c'est un secreth (which Napoleon doubtless knows as well as I do), that Ledru intends to go into action in Paris in 3-4 weeks. I have been told by an eye-witness that the first news of the rising in Milan created a great sensation in Paris. Gatherings in the streets, etc., not to rebel but to confer. On the whole the FRENCHMEN here are well content that Mr Mazzini should have discredited himself by his 'ACTION'. They see themselves avenged.0

Thanks to Cluss our appeal on behalf of the Cologne people'1—6 lines long—has appeared in all the American papers, in each case under the auspices of the local gymnastic club. ° Nous [verrons].'' Our dear acquaintances in Cologne itself have as yet given no sign of life. That's caution for you! One of them, ex-lieutenant Steffen, who figured as a defence witness at the Cologne trial, is here and promptly found himself a teaching post in Friedländer's establishment. Blind is dunning me daily for the Herzen* as is Dronke for Reichenbach's circular. " This is essential to Dronke since he wants to become a correspondent of the

Volkshalle in Cologne under another name.

What do you think of the lively sympathy shown by the clerics of the Established Church towards the unfortunate Ten Hours Movement341? Always the same old game. On Saturday I'll send you a parcel containing all the remaining newspapers, and letters from Cluss.

Mrs Harney ' is dead. Likewise Mrs von Brüningk. A short while ago there was an exchange of letters between myself and

[^1]: Of all LITTLE FINALITY JOHNSg PERFORMANCES, the last was probably the most classical.342 Even The Times was forced to admit that JOHNNY

[^2]: . j

[^3]: EXCITES 'MIGHTILY LITTLE ENTHUSIASM'

[^4]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - b but it's a secret - c See this volume, p. 73. - d K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Appeal for Support of the Men Sentenced in Cologne', New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 45, 21 January 1853. - e We shall see. - f A. Herzen, Du développement des idées révolutionnaires en Russie. - s Nickname given by the Radicals to John Russell who qualified the 1832 Parliamentary Reform as finality of Britain's constitutional development. - h The Times, No. 21350, 12 February 1853 [leader], - ; Mary



