---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "143. Engels to Marx. 10 March "
Page_Range: "316-320"
---

# 143. Engels to Marx. 10 March 



**[p. 283]**

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published considerably abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin,

1929

143

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, 10 March 1853]

Dear Marx,

Yesterday I sent off one half of a fiver to you and, at the same time, the other half under cover to Dronke. I'm really in a fix; in February I had to fork out some £50 to repay debts, etc., and there'll be another £30 or so to be paid out this month and next. Otherwise I'd have sent you more. A reform of my PERSONAL EXPENSES is urgently called for and, in a week or a fortnight's time, I shall move into cheaper LODGINGS and also resort to less potent liquor so as to prepare myself for the great moment when the balance is struck. Last year, thank God, I gobbled up half of my old man's profits from the business here. As soon as my old man's arrival becomes imminent, I shall remove to select LODGINGS, buy select cigars and wines, etc., so that we can impress him. Voilà la vie^

By his statements/ Monsieur Kossuth has utterly ruined himself in the eyes of people up here, German as well as English. Mazzini likewise, by the insurrection itself335 and by his sordid way of

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: 3 See this volume, pp. 213-14. - b That's life. - c Two statements by Kossuth published in various English newspapers in February and March 1853 which denied his participation in the Milan uprising. See, in particular, 'M. M. Kossuth and Mazzini and The Times' and 'A Letter from Kossuth', The Daily News, Nos. 2105 and 2117, 18 February and 4 March 1853.





**[p. 284]**

T h e MINISTRY OF ALL THE TALENTS 3 4 3 TURNS OUT A COMPLETE HUMBUG. Johnny,1 more shrunken than ever; the great Gladstone, a self-complacent know-all à la Mevissen; Aberdeen, full of diploma- tic-toryistic reminiscences and consummate courtier; the late messiah Peel's apostle John, Sidney Herbert, a wholly incompetent Secretary at War,—they're a fine LOT. At the same time they all feel somewhat out of place, except for shameless old Palmerston, who is at home everywhere and, witness the Mazzini debate in both Houses,344 as MUTINOUS as ever. Indeed, ever since the debate on Greece,345 the Militia Bill62 and the debate on the Address,346

he has been de facto LEADER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, and it is bitterly ironical that, for form's sake, poor Johnny should be given this post. But when, in this capacity, Johnny goes on to ask for a salary, it is carrying effrontery beyond all bounds; however a new post is, of course, a godsend to both parties. I shall be curious to see Master Gladstone's budget; what he said about the ESTIMATES and Hume's Tariff motion34 leads one to expect that he will leave everything more or less as it was, which is about all that is likely to resuk from this patriotic coalition ministry. Meanwhile, the tales of corruption during the last election are really capital and will doubtless necessitate some sort of Reform Bill during the next session. If, by then, TRADE has deteriorated and the Continent bestirs itself, we can expect some fine goings-on.

I now have at home the book by Urquhart,c the mad MP who denounces Palmerston as being in the pay of Russia. The explanation is a simple one: the fellow's a Celtic Scot with a Saxon-Scottish upbringing, by inclination a Romantic, by upbring- ing a FREETRADER. This chap went to Greece as a Philhellene 48 and, after 3 years of fighting the Turks, proceeded to Turkey and went into raptures about these self-same Turks. He enthuses over Islam on the principle, 'if I wasn't a Calvinist, I could only be a

[^1]: a that dear - b Russell - c [D. Urquhart,] Turkey and Its Resources: Its Municipal Organization and Free Trade





**[p. 285]**

The Czarb is now intriguing against this happy land through the agency of Greek clerics, and England has constantly allowed this same Czar to lead her by the nose. England must support Turkey, etc., etc., and other commonplaces as hoary as they are trivial. On the whole this book is highly entertaining. The really choice thing about it is that it forms the basis for the entire policy of the English, anti-Palmerston liberals, e.g. all the articles in The Daily News on the Turkish mummery are simply paraphrases of Urquhart who, qua FREETRADER, enjoys absolute confidence, al- though he blames the English for destroying Thessaly's industry with their imports—but in a HIGHLANDER a certain licence may be permitted.

There is one good aspect to it, namely that The Times, even though primarily in the Russian interest, is at long last attacking the old philistine nonsense about Turkey's integrity.0 The asinine Daily News which, in its blinkered bourgeois way, can see no

[^1]: a Victoria - b Nicholas I - c The Times, Nos. 21365 and 21369, 2 and 7 March 1853, leaders.

[^2]: 11—2736





**[p. 286]**

The Austro-Prussian tariff business350 is the only step forward Germany has succeeded in making—et encoreb\ The thing has so many strings attached, and so many vital issues have been left to later committees, while the actual tariff reductions are so minimal, that little will come of it. Come the great industrial crisis, and the whole trade agreement will vanish into thin air in the face of the general débâcle.

Here all that happens is thieving, broken bones on the railways, and flying up in the air. The local philistines are quite dumbfounded by the extraordinary events of the past week. Fortunately cotton is going down, which is why nothing is happening on the Exchange and people can concern themselves to their heart's content with these momentous occurrences. The spinning mills and most of the weaving mills are still fully occupied, but in coarse calicoes (DOMESTICS) there is total stagnation and, as from Monday, all factories in this trade will be working only 3 days a week.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Regards to your wife and children. Dronke will have received the Reichenbach thing.c

[^2]: Will get the Herzen d one of these days; the snag is that just now I'm unable to write to my brother-in-law.e

[^3]: First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, t l m e

[^4]: 1929

[^5]: a The Daily News, No. 2117, 4 March 1853 (see this volume, p. 283). - b Here: and that's not much. - c See this volume, pp. 245 and 275. - d A. Herzen, Du développement des idées révolutionnaires en Russie (see this volume, pp. 273 and 275). - e Emil Blank



