---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "149. Engels to Marx. 10 April "
Page_Range: "334-336"
---

# 149. Engels to Marx. 10 April 



**[p. 149]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Sunday, 10 April [1853]

Dear Marx,

I return herewith Cluss' letter.361 And there, it seems, the matter will have to rest until we have before us the whole of Hirsch's document," and also his first statementb which Weydemeyer has retained (do you know anything more about this?). The Bangya business isn't very nice; however, au bout du compte,c it is better to settle it»now than later. According to what you write you have full proof against Bangya to hand now, and, of course, there is also Zerffi to vouch for the Greif business.0 Knowing as we do now what is coming, we have time to prepare a proper answer." I shall look out Bangya's and the fictitious Collmann's letters.' So far as I am concerned, the pamphlet8 can be printed in America.

Some of the things in Hirsch's statement are perfectly correct, e.g. concerning your letter from Manchester.362 At the same time, of course, he does his fair share of lying and keeping things under his hat. For instance, he forgets to say that he followed you to Manchester, clearly not by accident, and that, meeting us one Sunday in the Bury New Road with another loafer, he called out quite loudly as he went by: 'Good morning, Marx!' You will recall that we wondered who it might be; ce fut notre cher Hirsche Likewise the affair of Mrs Daniels' letter and the domiciliary visit.260

It is curious how many spies à la Cooper363 seem to be turning up just now. Chenu, Cherval, Hirsch. It's a good thing Hirsch now testifies that Bangya was never able to report anything about you except personal tittle-tatde.

Inquiries must be made about the persons mentioned. Lan- ckoronski is clearly none other than the 'Count L.' denounced by

[^1]: a W. Hirsch, 'Die Opfer der Moucharderie. Rechtfertigungsschrift', Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, Nos. 3-6, 1, 8, 15 and 22 April 1853. - b W. Hirsch, 'Erklärung [of 12 January 1852]', Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 7, 29 April 1853. - c after all - d See this volume, pp. 242-45. - e K. Marx, 'Hirsch's Confessions'. - f See this volume, pp. 239, 256 and 258. - 8 K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - h It was our dear Hirsch.





**[p. 302]**

Apropos. Not long ago Dronke made a terrible fuss about my not providing him AT A MOMENTS NOTICE with the Reichenbach circular299 and now, in the parcel of American papers, I find it reproduced at least ten times. Couldn't the lazy devil have searched it out himself?

Pour revenir.6 I don't believe anything can be done publicly for the time being, i.e. until we've had a thorough examination of the documents; preliminary steps, no more—for instance, finding out where the document came from, the present whereabouts of Hirsch and what he is doing and, if necessary, confronting the fellow in order to extract another written statement from him. I shall also take immediate steps to find out more about the business of Fleury and the theft364; unfortunately my informant, a personal acquaintance of his, is ill. Mind you send me without delay the requisite personal description, etc., etc.

Today I have leafed through most of the American papers sent to me. Much is very amusing but, when there's such a pile of them, it's a very trying and stultifying job. By comparison, Cluss' letters are a delight. I see that the Revelations are already appearing in the Neu-England-Zeitung365; it's really too bad of Weydemeyer not to have got them into the Criminal-Zeitung. The least he can now do is to catch up with the main content—drop him a heavy hint to that effect by the next STEAMER, otherwise it may never occur to him.

I have not yet read the pile of (New York) Demokrats in which Weydemeyer publishes his articles; I'm saving them up for this evening.

Between ourselves, I am now pretty well convinced that it was, after all, Monsieur Bangya who betrayed Kothes' address." It's a good thing nobody knows about it.

If the business of Hirsch and Bangya becomes any more involved, there'll be another job for us to do when you come up.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'Movements of Mazzini and Kossuth.—League with Louis Napoleon.— Palmerston'. - b B. Szemere, Graf Ludwig Batthyâny, Arthur Görgei, Ludwig Kos- suth - c K. Marx and F. Engels, The Great Men of the Exile. - d To return. - e See this volume, pp. 232 and 239.



