---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "153. Marx to Engels. 26 April "
Page_Range: "348-350"
---

# 153. Marx to Engels. 26 April 



**[p. 153]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 April 1853

DEAR Frederic,

I fear that nothing will come of my proposed trip.a Bamberger cannot discount the bill for me and Friedländer, who half- promised to do so, has now definitely refused. I have written to Strohn about it,S79 but look on this as a mere formality which I complied with pour acquit de conscience^ and for my wife's sake, without expecting anything to come of it.

A paper of mine for the Tribune (which included the first Turkish article)0 about Mazzini's presence here—again denied by his friends but on his orders, I think—was made the basis for a short LEADER on Mazzini's lucky escape, followed by the comment:

* "In this connection we may properly pay a tribute to the remarkable ability of the correspondent by whom this interesting piece of intelligence is furnished. Mr Marx has very decided opinions of his own, with some of which we are far from agreeing, but those who do not read his letters neglect one of the most instructive sources of information on the great questions of current European politics.'*d

As you see, I am firmly in the saddle. I have in addition had a most interesting letter from Cluss with 2 issues containing Hirsch's confessions'* (not yet concluded). I'm not sending the stuff yet since there's still a chance that something might happen to enable me to come myself and bring the things with me. Anyhow, I won't come without notifying you beforehand. When is your old man arriving? I'd rather not cannon into him.

If only Dana would advise me of a business house here, as I have asked him three times to do, I should at least be over the worst.

Ad vocem1 Hirsch: Originally I was of the same opiniong as yourself, but the matter is somewhat different. Stieber and Goldheim are definitely here, their purpose being to 'link'

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 303 and 314. - b to salve my conscience - c K. Marx and F. Engels, 'British Politics.—Disraeli.—The Refugees.—Mazzini in London.— Turkey'. - d New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3736, 7 April 1853. - e W. Hirsch, 'Die Opfer der Moucharderie. Rechtfertigungsschrift', Belletristisches Journal und New- Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, presumably Nos. 3 and 4, 1 and 8 April 1853. - f re - 8 See this volume, pp. 301-02.



the Jew Goldheim

about 6' black, short ditto, ditto sallow, puffy features blue Wears black trousers, a light yellow and sack, black hat.

'London, 21.4.53 Announcement

Recent arrivals: Police Commissioner Stieber and the Jew Goldheim, a police lieutenant, both of Berlin (P.T.O.)

Description

Stieber Medium height (about 5 ) Hair: black" short Moustache: ditto, ditto Complexion: sallow and muddy Wears dark, narrow trousers, a

sack, a collapsible stuff hat, spectacles.

N.B. Both of them regularly go about together and are accompanied by Hirsch, a commercial assistant from Hamburg, and Haering, a postal clerk from Willich's birth-place. Today Stieber and Goldheim had a meeting with Bangya. Stieber and Goldheim visit the Prussian Embassy regularly every day between 11 and 3.'

I believe the author to be Henry de L'Aspée, friend and compatriot of O. Dietz, that same aggrieved policeman who, you will recall, was to have [a meeting] with us after your arrival here for the purpose of making further revelations. You can see what headway 'Hirsch' is making. Nothing could be more inopportune for Willich-Kinkel.

Your

K. M.

As to the pound,b I shall give them each 10/-, since so far as I know there's some prospect of Pieper's getting his money without a lawsuit. The poor devil is hellish syphilitic and at the same time in rotten CIRCUMSTANCES and too featherbrained to look after himself.

[^1]: FAREWELL.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei Zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, time Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 314. - b Reference to the help given to Dronke and Pieper.



