---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "154. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 26 April "
Page_Range: "350-351"
---

# 154. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 26 April 



**[p. 154]**

MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS

IN WASHINGTON

[London, 26 April 1853]

Dear Cluss,

You must by now have received three letters from me.381

Enclosed a Jones Paper, containing an anti- Times article by 'Englishman'.3

If the Cologne Revelations have not yet been printed as a pamphlet, or 'gratis' as such by the Neu-England-Zeitung, do nothing more about it, as it is now too late.

Willich has written to Herzen (the Russian) to say that everything is going 'splendidly', that he has achieved 'great results' and will soon be returning.

Mr Hentze, for one, is again implicated in the Berlin business.1' In any case, as Willich-Kinkel's agent, he would have been possessed of old proclamations and revolutionary recipes. Furthermore, he was destined by these great men to be military commander of Berlin.

The local Rollinists' are blushing for shame over Ruge's proclamation of which they were informed by us. In no case had Ledru given Ruge permission to publish this discreditable letter. Ruge extorted the letter from Ledru through the latter's ex-servant, the ex-Palatinate lawyer, and ex-French deputy, Savoye—one-time pedlar of German adjectival82 At all events, Ledru has sunk lower than ever before.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: '•' 'The Base and Brutal Times', The People's Paper, No. 51, 23 April 1853. Englishman—pen-name of Alfred Richards. - '• See this volume, pp. 315-16.- ' followers of Ledru-Rollin



