---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "155. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 26 April "
Page_Range: "351-352"
---

# 155. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer. 26 April 



**[p. 155]**

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 26 April 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Weydemeyer,

On 21 April I received the anonymous scrawl set out below. An identical anonymous letter was sent to the democratic tavern- keepers, Schärttner and Göringer. / have ASCERTAINED the facts contained therein. I think you should publish the thing (you may name Schärttner and Göringer) along with a few introduc- tory remarks dated London. Messrs Stieber and Goldheim have come over here in order to Hink' Kossuth's apocryphal gunpowder plot with the Berlin affair.3 From the following you will note to what extent the 'contrite' Hirsch continues to be 'A Victim of Moucharderie'.b Let us hope the blackguard doesn't succeed in finding fresh victims in Berlin. I think this business will prove his complete undoing in America. Cluss will have received what follows below at the same time as yourself. We were all very taken with your 2 articles in the Reform^ Only see to it that Kellner doesn't exploit you without a fitting quid pro quo in terms of political influence. Well, here is a word-for-word copy of the letter received by Schärttner, etc.:

[^1]: 'London, 21.4.53

[^2]: Announcement

[^3]: Recent arrivals: Police Commissioner Stieber and the Jew Goldheim, a police lieutenant, both of Berlin.

[^4]: Description

[^5]: Stieber the Jew Goldheim Medium height (about 5') about 6' Hair: black, short black, short Moustache: ditto, ditto ditto, ditto Complexion: sallow and muddy sallow, puffy features Wears dark, narrow trousers, a blue Wears black trousers, a light yellow sack,

[^6]: sack, a collapsible stuff hat, and black hat. spectacles.

[^7]: a See this volume, pp. 315-16. - b An allusion to Hirsch's 'Die Opfer der Moucharderie' - c Weydemeyer, 'Nationalökonomische Skizzen'.



