---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "156. Engels to Marx. 26 April "
Page_Range: "352-354"
---

# 156. Engels to Marx. 26 April 



**[p. 319]**

Today's Times reports the presence here of Stieber and Goldheim.3

Many regards to you and your wife.

Your

K. M.

As that fire-eater Heinzen has again had the audacity in his Volk to invoke the 'Chartists'—who simply want universal suffrage without having to bother their heads over communists or odious class distinctions, I think it high time you published in the Reform the letter written to you by Ernest Jones.82

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

156

[Manchester,] 26 April 1853

Dear Marx,

The sooner you come yourself,,the better. The bedroom in my house is ready.

Trade appears to be falling off already in France. In particular, direct imports of cotton from America have decreased. The

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX383

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Herewith the article378 and pound sterling. Even though one of the two CLAIMANTS b may suffer, fob him off until next week.

[^4]: a [Report from a Berlin correspondent of 22 April,] The Times, No. 21412, 26 April 1853. - b Dronke and Pieper, see this volume, p. 321.





**[p. 1850]**

To England 1,100,000 930,000 757,000 592,000

" France 257,000 302,000 246,000 192,000

All other countries 204,000 189,000 163,000 105,000

In other words, France is the only country which, despite the enormous American crop, has taken less than last year and barely more than in 1851, the year of political gloom, où l'ordre et la société allaient s'engloutir dans le gouffre socialiste? Imports in 1852 show the momentarily magical effect of the coup d'état, 1853 shows the reverse. Something was still being shipped from Liverpool to Havre, but not as much as formerly. In other respects too, industry in France would not appear to be exactly flourishing. This time the thing seems to be really serious, and connected especially with the ousting of French articles from foreign markets by domestic manufactures. The colossal proscriptions of workers in 1851/52 are beginning to bear fruit; I am convinced that they have contributed quite specifically to the expansion and improvement of the English and American factories producing Paris articles, bronzes, etc. Today it is a thousand times more difficult than before to drive the proletariat across the border with impunity on the pretext of order. Even if there were complete peace, French industry would inevitably go to the dogs owing to this perpetual exploitation of conspiracy as a moyen de gouvernement? and the constantly renewed proscription of the proletariat; the English and the Yankees certainly know how to take advantage of the more useful amongst these.

When, then, will you be coming?

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a when order and society were about to be swallowed up in the socialist abyss - b means of government



