---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "160. Engels to Marx. 20 May "
Page_Range: "356-357"
---

# 160. Engels to Marx. 20 May 



**[p. 323]**

Bamberger is willing to lend me £2 so that I can leave a few shillings with my wife and use the rest for my journey to you. J shall leave on Saturday morning!' Tomorrow is impossible.

Your

K. Marx

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

160

ENGELS TÖ MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Friday, 20 May 1853

Dear Marx,

Herewith the latest news from America. I still have several copies of the Criminal-Zeitung containing the statements by Weydemeyer and yourself,1 which I shall send at the beginning of next week so that you and the others can make use of them; I shall keep one copy here for Dronke and the archives.

Freiligrath will, perhaps, be so good as to notify Weydemeyer or Lièvre of the receipt of the £25 enclosed herewith,384 it being too late for me to write to Weydemeyer today. But how the fellows have managed to convert $125 into £25 is a mystery to me, for according to the last New York rate of 4 May sterling was standing at 54d. = 109s/4 cents, thus, even at 110 cents, $125=£25. lis. 4d., hence there has been a loss of s/2d. for every dollar on the rate of exchange.

My old man has at last written to me. As I expected: for God's

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, 'The Rocket Affair.—The Swiss Insurrection', and F. Engels, 'Political Position of the Swiss Republic'. - b 30 April. Marx stayed with Engels in Manchester till 19 May. - ,: J. Weydemeyer, 'Der "demokratische" Mouchard', Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 7, 29 April

[^2]: 1853, and K. Marx, 'Hirsch's Confessions'.



