---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "162. Engels to Marx. Before 28 May "
Page_Range: "358-361"
---

# 162. Engels to Marx. Before 28 May 

'Ähnliches'" instead of 'Rühmliches'}'

Nothing else of interest here. I have not seen Blind recently. Have you sent him his Herzenc?

The People's Paper is on the up and up and, for the time being, financially secure. Jones is convening mass meetings for 19 June et seq. at Blackstone Edge, Skurcoat Moor, Mount Sorrell and Nottingham Forest.385

Apropos. I was only able to give Pieper 10/-, Strohn having shown me the wrong RAILWAY GUIDE which caused me to miss the PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN,145 so that I had to travel 2nd class.386

Write to me soon.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t i m e

162

[Manchester, before 28 May 1853]

Dear Marx,

So the bomb is at long last about to go off, as you will see from the enclosed scrappy proofd and Weydemeyer's letter. Willich's manner of extricating himself is strange, at any rate; you will undoubtedly be much amused by these lame circumlocutions and the awkward and embarrassed style. The fellow's been hard hit. But papa Schramme would seem to have gravely insulted him in

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX387

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a similar - b glorious - c A. Herzen, Du développement des idées révolutionnaires en Russie. - d Proofs of Willich's statement published in Belletristisches journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 9, 13 May 1853. - *•' Conrad Schramm



So just because the New-Yorker-Criminal Zeitungl UU has published attacks upon him, the gallant Willich feels compelled to break his heroic silence.

'Putting the case at its highest*!' In Willich's case bodies do not fall downwards but upwards! Good-bye to gravity! The fellow's quite mad. The same old tale of assassination too! We shall now see the aforesaid Schramm leap promptly into the lists, statement in hand.388

To put your mind at rest, I can inform you that the Neu-England-Ztg. today advised me of the dispatch of 420 copies of Revelationsh to my address, so they may be here tomorrow or, if the parcel didn't go off by the last STEAMER, in a week at the most. The fellows have the effrontery to send me a letter signed semi-anonymously 'Office of the N.-E.-Z.' inviting me to contrib- ute. That's the last straw!

At all events, it's a good thing that we now possess in the Reform*89 an organ in which, if the worst comes to the worst, we can still make ourselves heard in the polemic against Willich and Co. As a result of the rumpus, Kellner is becoming more and more embroiled.

Weydemeyer's misprint shouldn't surprise you. After all, you must know that when Weydemeyer does something, it is always 'similar' rather than 'glorious'.'

The little fellowd is coming here next Sunday. I am curious to see how he is shaping as a clerk in Bradford. At all events the good Buckup seems to be working him very hard.

Yesterday I read the book on Arabian inscriptions which I told you about. 90 The thing is not without interest, repulsive though it is to find the parson and biblical apologist forever peeping through. His greatest triumph is to show that Gibbon made some mistakes in the field of ancient geography, from which he also concludes that Gibbon's theology was deplorable. The thing is called The Historical Geography of Arabia, by the Reverend Charles

Forster. The best things to emerge from it are:

1. The supposed genealogy of Noah, Abraham, etc., to be found in Genesis is a fairly accurate enumeration of the Beduin

[^1]: a Case in German=Fa//. The pun cannot be reproduced in English. - b K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne, - c See this volume, p. 325. - d Ernst Dronke



2. As for the great Arab invasion, you will remember our discussion when we concluded that, like the Mongols, the Beduins carried out periodic invasions and that the Assyrian and Babylo- nian Empires were founded by Beduin tribes on the very same spot as, later, the Caliphate of Baghdad. The founders of the Babylonian Empire, the Chaldeans, still exist under the same name, Beni Chaled, and in the same locality. The rapid construction of large cities, such as Nineveh and Babylon, happened in just the same way as the creation in India only 300 years ago of similar giant cities, Agra, Delhi, Lahore, Muttan, by the Afghan and/or Tartar invasions. In this way the Mohammedan invasion loses much of its distinctive character.

3. In the South-West, where the Arabs settled, they appear to have been a civilised people like the Egyptians, Assyrians, etc., as is evident from their buildings. This also explains many things about the Mohammedan invasion. So far as the religious fraud is concerned, the ancient inscriptions in the South, in which the ancient Arab national tradition of monotheism (as with the American Indians) still predominates, a tradition of which the Hebrew is only a small part, would seem to indicate that Mohammed's religious revolution, like every religious movement, was formally a reaction, a would-be return to what was old and simple.

It is now quite clear to me that the Jews' so-called Holy Writ is nothing more than a record of ancient Arab religious and tribal traditions, modified by the Jews' early separation from their tribally related but nomadic neighbours. The circumstance of Palestine's being surrounded on the Arabian side by nothing but desert, i.e. the land of the Beduins, explains its separate

[^1]: a more or less



