---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "163. Engels to Marx. 31 May "
Page_Range: "361-362"
---

# 163. Engels to Marx. 31 May 

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 f l r s t ü m e

163

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 31 May 1853

Dear Marx,

The bill on Dana has been paid; we shall have the money tomorrow and shall send it you without delay; Charles3 missed the chap twice today. There will be some loss on the rate of exchange, but less, I think, than if the bill were to be negotiated in London.

The parcel of pamphlets'1 has also arrived and will go off tomorrow. I shall keep 8 or 10 up here. It is fairly heavy and cost £\ 16/- which you can add on to the selling price. DUTY alone was 18/-, so, all things considered, it was a good thing it was addressed to me.

The little man c was here on Saturday and seems to be making out better than was to be expected. Buckup told Strohn that he was quite satisfied with him and that he had quickly familiarised himself with the work. I gave him a little sermon about punctuality; anyhow, conditions at Buckup's office are as favour- able as he could wish. He is already doing book-keeping and, if he continues to do well for 3 or 4 months, will have a secure berth.

[^1]: a Roesgen - b Marx's Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne published in Boston. - c Ernst Dronke



