---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "165. Marx to Engels. 2 June "
Page_Range: "363-368"
---

# 165. Marx to Engels. 2 June 



**[p. 330]**

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English for the first time

165

MARX TO ENGELS84

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 2 June 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Frederic,

The first half of the £20 note has turned up. I am writing this before going to the Museum,3 i.e. at a very early hour.

I would have sent you long ago the enclosed great Willich's statement to the Neu-England-Zeitungb had I not assumed that you'd had the thing from Weydemeyer. In conception this second statement is pure, GENUINE Willich. Others write 'essays', he writes 'facts',392 and only if one has been on a 'personal footing' with him does the calumny lose its sting. It is the manoeuvre of your petty partisan. He does not answer for his own Hirsch.' Rather, he explains to the public Marx's 'motives' for not refuting his Hirsch. And now he has discovered a terrain where he can operate with a measure of virtuosity. And it is with 'reluctance' that the noble man reveals the facts to the 'public'. Needless to say, he has preferred to whisper them to the philistines in the privacy of the beer-parlour

[^1]: a The library of the British Museum. - b A. Willich, 'An die Redaktion der

[^2]: Neu-England-Zeittmg, Louisville, den 2. Mai 1853', Neu-England-Zeitung, No. 62, 13 May 1853. - c An allusion to Willich's help in publishing Hirsch's 'Die Opfer der Moucharderie' (For details see K. Marx, 'The Knight of the Noble Conscious- ness', present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 481 and 498-99).





**[p. 331]**

Tout ça n'est pas trop mal pour un vieux sous-lieutenant!' But as for the style of statement No. 2—bad as it is, it is nevertheless apocryphal. Other hands have been at work on it, probably those of Madame Anneke. At all events, the necessary supplement to Tellering's pamphlet will now be published by Mr Willichc and, the dirty business having been once placed before the public, il faut aller jusqu'au bout? If Weydemeyer, Cluss and Co. operate with skill, they should now be able to put a spoke in Willich's wheel and ruin the impact and novelty of the surprises he is holding in store for the public. Nous verrons."

The praise you accord to my 'budding' English,' I find most encouraging. What I chiefly lack is first, assurance as to grammar and secondly, skill in using various secondary idioms which alone enable one to write with any pungency. Mr Tribune has given special prominence to a note about my 2nd article on Gladstone's Budget,8 drawing the attention of readers to my MASTERLY EXPOSITION' and going on to say that NOWHERE have they seen A MORE ABLE CRITICISM' and do NOT EXPECT TO SEE ONE.11 Well, that is ALL RIGHT. But in the following article it proceeds to make an ass of me by printing under my name a heading of mine1 which is quite trifling and intentionally so, whereas it appropriates your 'Swiss' thing.' I shall write and tell Dana that, 'flattering' though it may be if they occasionally use my things for a LEADER, they would oblige me by

[^1]: a with Kinkel's assistance - b Not too bad for an old second lieutenant. - c E. [Müller-]Tellering, Vorgeschmack in die künftige deutsche Diktatur von Marx und Engels. - d it must be taken to its conclusion - e We shall see. - f See this volume, pp. 329-30. - s K. Marx, 'Riot at Constantinople.—German Table Moving.—The Budget'. - h New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3761, 6 May 1853, leader. See also present edition, Vol. 12, Note 57. - ' Section 'The Rocket Affair' in Marx's and Engels' 'The Rocket Affair.—The Swiss Insurrection'. - i F. Engels, 'Political Position of the Swiss Republic' published over Marx's signature.





**[p. 332]**

As regards the Hebrews and Arabs,d I found yor letter most interesting. It can, by the by, be shown that 1. in the case of all eastern tribes there has been, since the dawn of history, a general relationship between the SETTLEMENT of one section and the continued nomadism of the others. 2. In Mohammed's time the trade route from Europe to Asia underwent considerable modifi- cation, and the cities of Arabia, which had had a large share of the trade with India, etc., suffered a commercial decline—a fact which at all events contributed to the process. 3. So far as religion is concerned, the question may be reduced to a general and hence easily answerable one: Why does the history of the East appear as a history of religions?

On the subject of the growth of eastern cities one could hardly find anything more brilliant, comprehensive or striking than Voyages contenant la description des états du Grand Mogol, etc. by old François Bernier (for 9 years Aurangzeb's physician). He provides in addition a very nice account of military organisation and the manner in which these large armies fed themselves, etc. Concern- ing both these he remarks inter alia:

[^1]: 'The main body consists of cavalry, the infantry not being so numerous as is commonly supposed si ce n'est qu'avec les véritables gens de guerre, on ne confond tous ces gens de service et de bazars ou marchés qui suivent l'armée; car, en ce cas-là, je croirais bien qu'ils auraient raison dé mettre les 2 et 300 000 hommes dans l'armée seule qui est avec le roi, et quelquefois encore davantage, comme quand on est assuré qu'il sera longtemps absent de la ville capitale; ce qui ne semblera pas si fort étonnant à qui saura l'étrange embarras de tentes, de cuisines, de hardes, de meubles et de femmes même assez souvent, et par conséquent d'éléphans, de chameaux, de boeufs, de chevaux, de portefaix, de fourrageurs, vivandiers, marchands de toutes sortes et de serviteurs qui traînent après soi ces

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Revolution in China and in Europe'. The Tribune editors may have included both articles in this one publication. - b anything under the sun - c All in all. - d See this volume, pp. 326-28.





**[p. 333]**

In reference to the Grand Mogul's march on Kashmir, with an army 400,000 strong, he writes:

'La difficulté est de savoir d'où et comment peut subsister une si grande armée en campagne, une si grande quantité d'hommes et d'animaux. Il ne faut pour cela que supposer, ce qui est très vrai, que les Indiens sont fort sobres et fort simples dans leur manger, et que de tout ce grand nombre de cavaliers il n'y a pas la dixième, ni même la vingtième partie, qui, dans la marche, mange de la viande; pourvu qu'ils aient leur kicheris ou mélange de riz et d'autres légumes, sur lesquels ils versent du beurre roux quand ils sont cuits, ils sont contents. Il faut encore savoir que les chameaux résistent extrêmement au travail, à la faim et à la soif, vivent de peu et mangent de tout, et qu'aussitôt que l'armée est arrivée, les chameliers les mènent brouter à la campagne, où ils mangent tout ce qu'ils attrapent; de plus que les mêmes marchands qui entretiennent les bazars dans Delhi, sont obligés de les entretenir dans les campagnes, ebenso die petits marchands etc. enfin à l'égard du fourrage, tous ces pauvres gens s'en vont rôdant de tous les côtés dans les villages pour en acheter et y gagner quelque chose, et que leur grand et ordinaire refuge est de râper, avec une espèce de truelle, les campagnes entières, battre ou laver cette petite herbe qu'ils ont râpée, et l'apporter vendre à l'armée'

Bernier rightly sees all the manifestations of the East—he mentions Turkey, Persia and Hindustan—as having a common

[^1]: a 'unless all those serving-people and bazaar or market folk who follow the army are taken for true warriors; for, if such were the case, there would, I think, be good reason to put at 2 to 300,000 men the strength of that army alone that is with the king, and sometimes even more, as, for example, when it is known that he will be long absent from the capital city; which would not, indeed, seem so very surprising to anyone familiar with all the strange impedimenta of tents, kitchen, clothing, furniture, and even women quite often, and, consequently, elephants, camels, oxen, horses, porters, foragers, sutlers, merchants of all kinds and servants who follow in the wake of these armies, nor to anyone familiar with the conditions and government peculiar to the country, namely that the king is the sole and unique proprietor of all the lands in the kingdom, whence it necessarily follows that every capital city, such as Delhi or Agra, fixes almost wholly on the militia and is therefore obliged to follow the king whenever he goes campaigning for a time, these cities neither being, nor indeed able to be, in any respect a Paris, but being really nothing but an army encampment rather better and more commodiously situated than if it were in the open country.' (Marx's italics.) - b 'How and upon what so great an army can subsist in the field, or so large a concourse of men and animals, is difficult to conceive. To that end one can only surmise, and such is indeed the case, that the Indians are very sober and very simple in what they eat and that, of this



It would seem to be no go with Borchardt394; nevertheless I think the fellow might be prepared to try and obtain recommen- dations for Lupus from Steinthal, etc., to London merchants. So much, at least, you could compel him to do, and it would mean a great deal to Lupus.

What do you think about the failure of the hudibrastic Rodolphob Gladstone's 'FINANCIAL SCHEME FOR REDUCING THE NATIONAL

DEBT'?1

The day before yesterday the Journal des Débats revealed the true secret of Russia's impudence. The Continent, it says, must either expose its independence to danger from Russia, or it must expose itself to war, and that is 'la révolution sociale'. What the wretched Débats forgets, however, is that Russia is no less afraid of revolution than Mr Bertin, and that the whole question now is who can most convincingly simulate 'non-fear'. But England and France—the official ones—are so abject that Nicholas, if he sticks to his guns, will be able to do what he likes.

Vale faveque.d

C. M.

[^1]: Have written to Lassalle, who will probably be READY to take receipt of a few 100 copies of the pamphlet6 and distribute them

[^2]: great number of horsemen, not one tenth, nay, not even one twentieth, eats meat during the march; provided they have their khichri, or mess of rice and other vegetables, whereon they pour brown butter when cooked, they are content. It should also be known that camels are extremely resistant to work, hunger and thirst, live on very little and eat anything and that, as soon as the army reaches camp, the camel-drivers lead them out to graze in the countryside, where they eat everything that comes their way; further, that the same merchants that keep the bazaars in Delhi are obliged to keep them in the field also, likewise the lesser merchants, etc. finally, concerning forage, all these poor people go roving in every direction to the villages to buy the same and to earn something there, and that their chief and habitual recourse is to scratch up whole stretches of country with a kind of trowel, pounding and washing the little herbs thus scratched up, and taking them to the army for sale'

[^3]: a key - b An allusion to Ralpho—a character in Samuel Butler's satirical poem Hudibras. - c Marx described Gladstone's financial schemes in 'The New Financial Juggle; or Gladstone and the Pennies', 'Achievements of the Ministry', 'Affairs in Holland.—Denmark.—Conversion of the British Debt.— India, Turkey and Russia', 'The Russian Humbug.—Gladstone's Failure.—Sir Charles Wood's East India Reforms'. - d Good-bye and farewell. - e K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Com- munist Trial in Cologne (Boston edition).



