---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "166. Engels to Marx. 6 June "
Page_Range: "368-375"
---

# 166. Engels to Marx. 6 June 



**[p. 335]**

P.S. There's been a delay over the posting of this letter and so I can include an acknowledgment of the parcel of books and the other half of the NOTE.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart. 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 f l r s t t l m e

166

ENGELS TO MARX338

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 June [1853,] evening

Dear Marx,

I had intended to write to you by the first post today, but was detained at the office until 8 o'clock. You will have received both Weydemeyer's and Cluss' anti-Willich statements in the Criminal

Zeitung'' i.e. direct from America. If not, write to me at once. As usual, papa Weydemeyer is too long-winded, very seldom makes a point, then promptly blunts it with his style, and unfolds his well-known lack of verve with rare composure. Nevertheless, the man has done his best, the story about Hentze, the 'comrade-in- arms', and the influence of others on Hirsch's pen is nicely fashioned; his incredible style and his composure, regarded over there as impassibility, will appeal to the philistines, and his performance can, on the whole, be regarded as satisfactory. Cluss' statement, on the other hand, pleases me enormously. In every line we hear the chuckle of l'homme supérieur1 who, through 'personal contact' with Willich, has, as it were, become physically

[^1]: a Roesgen - h J. Weydemeyer, 'Weiters in der Willich-Hirsch'schen Angelegenheit'; A. Cluss, 'An die Redaktion der New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung', Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 10, 20 May 1853. - ' the superior man





**[p. 336]**

a fellow who is so dashing, so adroit, so aggressive by nature and yet so unassumingly noble in his bearing, and who returns thrust for thrust a tempo so subtly—far more subtly and deftly than himself. If only Willich had the discernment to discover this! But irritation and due reflection will, I trust, give him a little more insight.

It is obvious that we shall have to see this dirty business through to the bitter end. The more resolutely we tackle it the better. You'll find, by the way, that it won't be so bad after all. The chivalrous one has promised vastly more than he can fulfil. We shall hear of assassination attempts, etc., the Schramm affair will be glamorously tricked out,' and such chimeras will be evoked as will cause us to stare at one another in amazement, not having the faintest idea what the man is actually talking about; at worst he will tell the story about Marx and Engels arriving drunk one evening at Great Windmill Street24 (vide Kinkel in Cincinnati, coram Huzeliod). If he goes as far as that, I shall tell the scandal-loving American public what the Besançon Company39fi

used to talk about when Willich and the formosusc pastor Corydon Rauf were not present. Au bout du compte? what can a brute of this kind find to tax us with? Mark my word, it will be just as pauvre" as Tellering's smear.'

I shall be seeing Borchardt within the next few days. If any recommendations are to be had, you can trust me to get them J But I hardly imagine that Steinthal, etc., have connections of the sort in London. It's almost .wholly outside their line of business. Besides, if only for fear of making a fool of himself, the fellow will attempt to put off doing anything about it up here. If it were not for Lupus, I'd consign the chap, etc. I can't abide him, with his

[^1]: a constraint - b in good time - c See this volume, pp. 325-26. - d in Huzel's presence (ibid., pp. 148-50) - e comely - f Officer Rau is compared to shepherd Corydon, a character in pastoral poems who suffers from unrequited love. - t Come to that - h poor - ' An allusion to [Müller-]Te Ilering's Vorgeschmack in die künftige deutsche Diktatur von Marx und Engels. - > See this volume, p. 334.



;r ; M ^ ^ - ^ . ^ . ^-•*^r ^^** •^^»''F- **"*?>> "'

[^1]: ::":.^*

[^2]: Third page age of Engels' letter to Marx of <"> June 1853







**[p. 339]**

If Lassalle has given you a good, neutral address in Düsseldorf, you can send me 100 copies.3 We shall arrange for them to be packed in bales of twist by firms up here; but they should not be addressed to Lassalle himself, since the packages will go to Gladbach, Elberfeld and so on, where they will have to be stamped and sent by post to Düsseldorf. However, we cannot entrust a package for Lassalle or the Hatzfeldt woman to any local firm, because, 1. they all employ at least one Rhinelander who knows all the gossip, or 2. if that goes off all right, the recipients of the bales will get to know about it, or 3. at the very best the postal authorities will take a look at the things before delivering them. We have a good address in Cologne, but are not, alas, very well acquainted with the people who are the principal buyers here for the firm in Cologne, and hence cannot expect them to do any smuggling. Indeed, what we shall tell the people here is that the packages contain presents for the fair sex.

From all this you will gather that I am once again on passable terms with Charles.b The affair was settled with great dispatch at the first suitable opportunity. Nevertheless you will realise that the fool derives a certain pleasure from having been given preference over myself in one rotten respect at least, because of Mr Gottfried Ermen's envy of my old man. Habeat sibi.c He at any rate realises that if I so choose, I can become maître de la situation'' within 48 hours, and that's sufficient.

The absence of landed property is indeed the key to the whole of the East.397 Therein lies its political and religious history. But how to explain the fact that orientals never reached the stage of landed property, not even the feudal kind? This is, I think, largely due to the climate, combined with the nature of the land, more especially the great stretches of desert extending from the Sahara right across Arabia, Persia, India and Tartary ,9 to the highest of the Asiatic uplands. Here artificial irrigation is the first prerequi- site for agriculture, and this is the responsibility either of the communes, the provinces or the central government. In the East, the government has always consisted of 3 departments only: Finance (pillage at home), War (pillage at home and abroad), and travaux publics,'' provision for reproduction. The British govern-

[^1]: a K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see this volume, p. 334). - b Roesgen - ' Let him have it. - d master of the situation - e public works





**[p. 340]**



[^1]: a See this volume, p. 332.





**[p. 341]**

Old Bernier's stuffa is really very fine. It's a real pleasure to get back to something written by a sensible, lucid old Frenchman who constantly hits the nail on the head sans avoir l'air de s'en apercevoir!1

Since I am in any case tied up with the eastern mummery for some weeks, I have made use of the opportunity to learn Persian. I am put off Arabic, partly by my inborn hatred of Semitic languages, partly by the impossibility of getting anywhere, without considerable expenditure of time, in so extensive a language—one which has 4,000 roots and goes back over 2,000-3,000 years. By comparison, Persian is absolute child's play. Were it not for that damned Arabic alphabet in which every half dozen letters looks like every other half dozen and the vowels are not written, I would undertake to learn the entire grammar within 48 hours. This for the better encouragement of Pieper should he feel the urge to imitate me in this poor joke. I have set myself a maximum of three weeks for Persian, so if he stakes two months on it he'll best me anyway. What a pity Weitling can't speak Persian; he would then have his langue universelle toute trouvée' since it is, to my knowledge, the only language where 'me' and 'to me' are never at odds, the dative and accusative always being the same.399

It is, by the way, rather pleasing to read dissolute old Hafiz in the original lan'guage, which sounds quite passable and, in his grammar,0 old Sir William Jones likes to cite as examples dubious Persian jokes, subsequently translated into Greek verse in his Commentariis poeseos asiaticae, because even in Latin they seem to him too obscene. These commentaries, Jones' Works, Vol. II, De poesi erotica, will amuse you. Persian prose, on the other hand, is deadly dull. E.g. the Rauzât-us-safâ by the noble Mirkhond, who recounts the Persian epic in very flowery but vacuous language. Of Alexander the Great, he says that the name Iskander, in the Ionian language, is Akshid Rus (like Iskander, a corrupt version of Alexandros); it means much the same as filusuf, which derives from fila, love, and sufa, wisdom, 'Iskander' thus being synonym- ous with 'friend of wisdom'.

[^1]: a F. Bernier, Voyages contenant la description des états du Grand Mogol, de l'lndoustan, du Royaume de Cachemire, etc. See also this volume, pp. 332-34. - b without appearing to be aware of it - c universal language ready-made - d W. Jones, A Grammar of the Persian Language.



