---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "167. Engels to Marx. 9 June "
Page_Range: "375-377"
---

# 167. Engels to Marx. 9 June 



**[p. 342]**

More tomorrow.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 f l r s t t i m e

167

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 June 1853

Dear Marx,

So that Pieper may see he hasn't been forgotten, inform him of the following. In yesterday's Manchester Guardian there was the offer of a post as CORRESPONDING CLERK AND BOOKKEEPER. He might contrive to get £180 a year; from what I hear, it is with a Jew here, Leo Schuster. Pieper should at once write a letter addressed to:

Box B 47,

Post Office,

Manchester

and beginning: Monsieur, etc.

The letter had best be written in French, since French and German are required. He should say he thinks he can fill the post, that he comes from Hanover, is aged such-and-such, and last worked for so-and-so in London, from whom inquiries may be made as to his character and qualifications. He can conduct correspondence in German, French and English and, if needs be, in Italian, is rather less familiar (if indeed this is the case) with



**[p. 343]**

J'ai l'honneur de me souscrire', or else, 'Mr., votre très dévoué',3 etc. Nothing more. If they consider him, he will probably be summoned to Schuster's London house, and then it will be up to him. But he must write straight away, by the first post tomorrow.

Herewith £1. 18. 6d., the balance of the £32. The fellow only deducted 18 pence for collecting charges but, on the other hand, all Charlesb and I owed him.

You will have received the bill from America the day before yesterday.

Whether Pieper can give Rothschild as a reference, you people in London will be best able to judge; if so, it might do no harm, for the fact that Pieper is no BRED CLERK will emerge at the very first interview when they ask him where he worked before. But he must be sure of what Rothschild is going to say and, perhaps, see him beforehand.

Your

F. E.

Copie d'Annoncée

[To refer to me would do no good whatever, indeed it might do harm. Pieper, of course, should not let Schuster see that he knows who inserted the advertisement to which he should refer as his reason for applying.]

[^1]: * Wanted in a Shipping House a Bookkeeper and Corresponding Clerk. A knowledge of German and French absolutely required. Address Box B 47, P. Off. Manchester.*

[^2]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a The whole without frills and told as simply as possible. 'I have the honour to sign myself, or else, 'I am, sir, your most obedient'. - b Roesgen. See this volume, p. 344. - c The memo is in pencil; the last paragraph is barely legible.



