---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "170. Marx to Engels. 29 June "
Page_Range: "383-384"
---

# 170. Marx to Engels. 29 June 



**[p. 350]**

First published in part in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to a letter from Bd. 2, Nr. 31, Stuttgart, 1906-07 and in Cluss to Weydemeyer of 28 June full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second 1853 Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962 . . , . , Published in English in full for the first time

170

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 June 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

My sister0 and her newly wedded husbandd, who is sailing from here- to the Cape of Good Hope as a GENERAL DEALER, have unexpectedly descended on me. This, combined with the work for the Tribune and some unpleasantness to be cleared up in America, has made considerable demands on my time. The couple set out tomorrow, I believe. I hear from Imandt that your mother is expected in London, from which I conclude that you, too, will turn up soon.

Enclosed Lassalle's instructions for the dispatch of the copies6 to Germany. My wife will undertake their dispatch to Manchester. I hope that you people will then take care of the matter up there. Haven't you seen anything of Jones? He's roaming about in your part of the world and is said to have brought off a MONSTER MEETING in Halifax.408

Last Wednesday, much to my astonishment, I received a very peevish letter from Cluss, in which he said someone had written telling him that Pieper had described him to Schläger—him and Arnold—as 'subordinate agents', and himself, on the contrary, as the one who supplied news 'at first-hand', etc., etc. Fortunately

[^1]: a The reason is very simple. - b Quite the contrary. - c Louise - d Jaan Carel Juta - e K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.



