---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "171. Marx to Engels. 8 July "
Page_Range: "384-385"
---

# 171. Marx to Engels. 8 July 



**[p. 351]**

Before leaving for Manchester410 I borrowed £2 from the little Jew Bamberger. The fellow keeps sending me strongly-worded reminders, if not threats. Mais nous verrons." By Friday I shall have £20 to draw on New York. But again the question is how?

Enclosed the nee plus ultra" of Heinzen's now sanguinary cowardice and aversion to 'ordinary methods of warfare' .c

I was mistaken about the 'Swiss article',6 Dana having divided the thing into two parts,e but published both under my name.

Until next time, then. My worthy sister and brother-in-law have just come in. My sister is very stout and will sweat damnably while crossing the Equator.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stutt- . rarr 1913 Published in English tor the tirst ° ' ' time

171

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 July 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I'm at a loss to understand whether your continued silence is due to illness, pique, overwork or what.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: Dr Jacobi, the bearer of this note, was one of the accused at the 'communist trial in Cologne'.16

[^3]: a But we shall see. - b uttermost - c K. Heinzen's pamphlet Mord und Freiheit. - d See this volume, p. 331. - e K. Marx and F. Engels. 'The Rocket Affair.—The Swiss Insurrection'; F. Engels, 'Political Position of the Swiss Republic'.



