---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "172. Engels to Marx. 9 July "
Page_Range: "385-387"
---

# 172. Engels to Marx. 9 July 



**[p. 352]**

In any case write and tell me why you're not writing. I hope, AT AIL EVENTS, that you are not ill.

Your

K. M.

[On the back of the letter]

Friedrich Engels. 48 Great Ducie Street, Manchester

First published (except the text on the Printed according to the original back of the letter) in Der Briefwechsel

zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Published in English for the first Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and t l m e

Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962

172

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, Saturday, 9 July [1853]

Dear Marx,

At four o'clock this morning my old landlady roused me from my slumbers saying there was a gentleman wanting to speak to me. Dragging myself out of bed, I went to the door where I found a little man with a CAB, a colossal trunk and a travelling bag, who told me his name was Jacobi and that you and Pieper had sent him to me. Marx and Pieper! I thought. Who the devil can this

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a at a moment - b the most necessary things





**[p. 353]**

This warliked Westphalian way of behaving, the doltishness of spending a whole week in London and then choosing a train that arrives in the middle of the night and, on the pretext of not knowing what's what, turning a man's house upside down and imposing himself, all this was no more calculated to predispose me in his favour than was the discreet question put to me at the very outset as to how I stood with my old man. Further exchanges have raised the fellow in my estimation a little, but not very much. He proposes to call on Borchardt with letters from you and Kinkel (almost beats Marx and Pieper), to burst in on little Heckscher without ceremony and without an introduction in the hope that the latter will immediately provide him with all possible informa- tion about his TRADE and, for sheer joy at the prospect of fresh 'scientific' intercourse, make half his practice over to his new competitor—and other such philistine conceits. His foolishness in going to Kinkel will do him more harm than good. Kinkel gives him letters not to Mr but to Mrs Schunck, a piece of effrontery which is also a gross and direct breach of English etiquette, and again, if Mr Kinkel, who was fed and paid cash for his buffooneries on German literature, if Monsieur Gottfried, I say, believes he can send letters of recommendation (other than fund-raising licences) d'égal à égal" to these merchants, he's damned well mistaken. Apart from that, Monsieur Jacobi, à ce qu'il me paraît,' is not the man to make his fortune here.

As soon as my old man has left, I'll send you some money. I

[^1]: a Dr Johann Jacoby - '• See previous letter. - c What's to be done? - d Marx uses the word 'kriegisch', which may mean 'warlike' or may be a pun on the name 'Kriege'. - •' as between equals - ' or so it seems to me



