---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "173. Marx to Engels. 18 July "
Page_Range: "387-388"
---

# 173. Marx to Engels. 18 July 



**[p. 354]**

The idea that I am not writing because of 'pique' made me laugh. De quoi donc?11

Regards to your wife and children and do your best to stick it out, at least until my hands are free again—within the week, I hope.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

173

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 July 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

The day before yesterday I got a letter from Lassalle, who is now in a state of suspense, imagining letters have been inter- cepted, etc. It would have been good had you advised me whether or not the parcel had gone off to him.b Lassalle is still the only one who dares correspond with London, and we must therefore be careful not to put him off. So I would ask you to let me know what the position is about the parcel. The time of its dispatch is of importance to me in another way, i.e. because upon it depends the time of the RETURN.

The last mail brought my wife a most friendly and obliging letter from A. Dana4 in which he states that he cannot possibly advise us of a business house in London and that AT ALL INSTANCES bills drawn by me will be promptly honoured. He says that my

[^1]: a What about? - b See this volume, p. 350.



