---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "174. Marx to Engels. 18 August "
Page_Range: "388-390"
---

# 174. Marx to Engels. 18 August 



**[p. 355]**

In the debate on ADVERTISEMENT DUTY 4 1 2—about a fortnight ago, I think—Mr Bright was loud in his praises of the New-York Tribune and gave an analysis of one of its numbers"—the very one containing my article on the budget. b This is what he said about it:

* 'From Great Britain there is an elaborate disquisition on the Right Honourable Gentleman'sc budget, doing him justice in some parts, but not in others, and doing certainly, as far as the Manchester School was concerned, no justice whatever.' *

As regards Jacobi, you must not allow yourself to be deterred by the gaucherie and inexperience of a 23-year-old stripling from the District of Minden who has spent 2 years in jug. H e has a good background. I have read his doctoral dissertation4 1 3 and was 'MUCH

PLEASED WITH IT'.

Your

K. M.

Jones has held some very important meetings which have even attracted the attention of the bourgeois press.414

174

MARX T O ENGELS

[London,] 18 August 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Lupus will probably obtain a good post in Liverpool. In which case h e will go there via Manchester. T h e snag is that he won't be paid until the end of the quarter. However, he hopes that you and

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published m English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3761, 6 May 1853. - b K. Marx, 'Riot at Constan- tinople.—German Table Moving.—The Budget'. - c Gladstone - d J. Bright, Speech in the House of Commons on 1 July 1853, The Times, No. 21470, 2 July 1853.





**[p. 356]**

Needless to say, that mischief-monger Dronke is writing the most pompous letters to all and sundry, e.g. to Imandt, saying that 'he has made arrangements for Lupus' emigration to America'.

Entre nous" I should say the little shop-assistant, anxious to inflate his own importance at small cost to himself, has given Lupus to understand that it was he rather than you who took the matter in hand. At least I thought I could detect a certain chilliness towards Manchester ON THE PART OF Wolff. Dronke is cancan'' incarnate, NO DOUBT ABOUT THAT. Experto crede, etc.'

You absolutely must at once send Pieper at least sufficient to buy himself a coat and trousers. Shabby as he now is, he cannot possibly take advantage of opportunities that come his way, however favourable. He has become unpresentable. Moreover, you promised him this when fyou] left.415 He's putting a brave face on his misfortunes. But there's a limit to everything.

[I have] been particularly unlucky over money transactions. I now have current bills on America—two of them—amounting to £42 and yet cannot command above 42 farthings, though having to provide means of subsistence not [only] for myself but also for Pieper. The first bill of £24 I gave to Mr Spielmann; he told me to come back in five weeks' time. That was seven weeks ago. Besides, this wretched traipsing to and from the City invariably takes up my Mondays and Thursdays, the very days when I have to be preparing Tuesday's and Friday's articles. Each time Spielmann turns me away with the remark, uttered in Jewishly nasal tones: 'Nah nahtice yet.' In the case of such 'small' amounts, he says, his correspondents write only at their convenience, and, if I had needed the money straight away, I should have said beforehand that I would pay the postage for a special letter, etc., etc. This means daily unpleasantnesses, not only for me but for my wife who, counting on the prompt arrival of the money, had given definite promises to sundry creditors, and now the curs are laying siege to the house. Meanwhile, I am writing away like the devil. It would be fine if you could send me an article or two in between whiles, thus giving me the time to write something better. U of my time is taken up chasing after PENNIES.

Heise is here just now; as a person the fellow's not at all bad. Mr Kossuth is presently making a fool of himself as correspondent

[^1]: a Between ourselves - b gossip - c Experto crede Roberto.—Trust Roberto who has had experience (from a comic poem by Antoine Arena).



