---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "175. Engels to Marx. 24 August "
Page_Range: "390-391"
---

# 175. Engels to Marx. 24 August 



**[p. 357]**

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

175

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Wednesday, 24 August 1853

Dear Marx,

I'll send some money tomorrow if I possibly can. Your letter arrived on Saturday too late for anything to be done, this week there have been all sorts of complications, but tomorrow things will, I think, have improved, and our old bookkeeper has been forewarned.

The little man h was here on Saturday. That he had been gossiping was evident to me from the moment he wrote to Borchardt. He had sent him Lupus' most discreditable letter in which the latter makes an outright and most earnest appeal to the 'generosity' of the Jews in Bradford. C'était une lettre à brûler de suite"; Borchardt at once magnanimously sent Lupus alms, to wit the sum of one pound,—not that he wasn't very decent about it, WHICH HE COULD WELL AFFORD to be, seeing that it released him from all his obligations. I must confess that this letter of Lupus' left a very bad taste in my mouth, but not so bad as the little man's tactlessness in letting it fall into Borchardt's clutches. Anyway I duly hauled him over the coals for it.

[^1]: a D. Urquhart, 'What Means "Protection" of the Greek Church?', 'Time in Diplomacy.—The "European Recognition"', 'The Relative Power of Russia and Great Britain', 'War between England and France', published as letters to the editor in The Morning Advertiser of 11, 12, 15 and 16 August 1853. - b Ernst Dronke - ' It was a letter that ought to have been burnt forthwith.



