---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "180. Marx to Engels. 17 September "
Page_Range: "401-402"
---

# 180. Marx to Engels. 17 September 



**[p. 180]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 September 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Frederic,

You're becoming damned taciturn. Since I was expecting YOUR ARTICLE yesterday, all I had done was to make up a heading from the most recent news and, since the letter didn't come, one lot of correspondence went by the board.

I really must ask for your co-operation for the fortnight beginning today. For today Pieper is going, not into a monastery exactly, but into the German Hospital, a sort of medical prison, where he is to spend a fortnight or 3 weeks being thoroughly cured of the painful consequences of his carnal lust. Since I have in any case forfeited 3 or 4 articles through having to traipse off to that rotten Spielmann,a I must now write something every Tuesday and Friday so that the next bill I draw is not too paltry. There is a possibility of Freiligrath's finding a business friend who will regularly discount them for me.

If you can manage to do something in between times, I shall send you the other stuff to look through, in which case you will only have to preface or conclude it with the latest news you may have seen about TURKEY in the Débats, say, or some particularly important telegraphic dispatch, before sending the stuff to Liverpool.

I think it important that something be said about the position of the armies, etc. There's a great deal of nonsense in the English papers, e.g. Omer Pasha is said to be crossing the Danube, etc.

I have already sent off two articles about the commercial crisis, 1 last Friday week about the Bank of England, its DISCOUNT and the effect of Peel's Act, or rather intended effect.0 1 last Tuesday on the price of corn, signs OF OVERPRODUCTION, etc.d

[^1]: I expect an article42' from you for Tuesday.b

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 356. - b 20 September - c 9 September. K. Marx, 'The Vienna Note.—The United States and Europe.—Letters from Shumla.— Peel's Bank Act'. - d 13 September. K. Marx, 'Political Movements.—Scarcity of Bread in Europe'.



