---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "181. Engels to Marx. 19 September "
Page_Range: "402-404"
---

# 181. Engels to Marx. 19 September 



**[p. 369]**

DISTRICTS.

Enclosed something further by the Tribune m a n " and 'on' him by the EDITORS of the Tribune. It would seem, by the by, that he is not a Russian AFTER ALL, but A GERMAN. T h e abolition of the advertisement duty means that Jones' advertisements now bring him in £ 3 a week—the PAPERb IS ARRIVING TO THE PAYING POINT. This could also provide Pieper with a source of income.

When you write, you must also tell me about Lupus' travels. I heard later that he didn't push off from here until last Saturday.1

FAREWELL.

Your

K. M.

Enclosed another cutting from the worthy Neu-England-Zeitung.d

First published in Der Briefwechsel zun- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

181

ENGELS T O MARX

Manchester, 19 September 1853

Dear Marx,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: What has hitherto been stopping me from working and writing has been the presence of the 'old gent'e who is temporarily encamped with me. T h e r e was no berth to be had on the SCREW-STEAMER and Borchardt was also very much in favour of his trying to get lessons here first; moreover, there were prospects for him in Liverpool as well. Anyway, he intends to try his luck here

[^3]: a Pulszky (see this volume, p. 288). - b The People's Paper - c 10 September - d Presumably Th. Poesche's 'Klassenkämpfer', Neu-England-Zeitung, 3 September 1853. - e Wilhelm Wolff



The Reform is arriving very irregularly. Have you heard anything from Cluss?

N. B. Since Lupus, as I see from your letter0 today, made off without any kind of leave-taking, he will naturally not be allowed to set eyes on anything you send me— il reste parfaitement en dehors de touf and, were it not for Borchardt, who got together £10 for his journey and is showing him kindness in other ways, my behaviour towards Monsieur Lupus would be somewhat cooler. Especially since the fellow, though as stubborn as ever, has lost his stoicism and become very dependent on those from whom he derives some advantage. Il est même devenu un peu flatteur1—and how!

However, we shall see whether a better position, if such is to be found here, doesn't soon bring the old gent to his senses again, in which case he'll have to ask your forgiveness as well.

Now I am off home to work.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t i m e

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 364-65. - b Adam Gurowski (see this volume, p. 365). - c 'Junius II' [Löwe], 'An den Graf Nesselrode', Deutsche Londoner Zeitung, Nos. 264 and 266, 19 April and 3 May 1850. - d See this volume, p. 369. - e he's left out of absolutely everything - f He's even become a bit of a flatterer



