---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "185. Marx to Engels. 30 September "
Page_Range: "408-410"
---

# 185. Marx to Engels. 30 September 

My regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

What do you think of Jacobi's melancholic and virtuous views about the end of the world?3

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

185

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 30 September 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: Your piece on the warb is capital. I myself had serious MISGIVINGS about the westward advance of the RUSSIAN FORCES but did not, of course, dare TRUST TO MY JUDGEMENT in such matters. I have already written a whole series of STRIKE articles,0 produced at intervals throughout the 6 months during which the thing has been going on. Now, however, the affair has taken a new TURN. In the article where I used your STRIKE-GENERALITIES,11 I have mentioned a host of

[^3]: a A. Jacobi, 'Ueber den Untergang der Erde'. - b F. Engels, 'The Russians in Turkey'. - c K. Marx, 'English Prosperity.—Strikes.—The Turkish Question.— India', 'Russian Policy Against Turkey.—Chartism', 'Financial Failure of Govern- ment.—Cabs.—Ireland.—The Russian Question', 'Rise in the Price of Corn.— Cholera.— Strikes.—Sailors' Movement', 'Panic on the London Stock Exchange.— Strikes'. - d K. Marx, 'Panic on the London Stock Exchange.—Strikes' (written in co-authorship with Engels) (see this volume, p. 372).



SUBMISSION.

As you can see, my HISTORY OF STRIKES goes no further than last Tuesday3 and doesn't touch on Manchester.

You might, perhaps, expand somewhat the notes on yarn and COTTON prices and, if possible, the price of GOODS, so that they amount to at least one paragraph of an article.

In each article, besides the subject proper, I naturally have to follow step by step the Russian Notes and England's FOREIGN POLICY (and right brave it is!), since the jackasses in New York consider this to be of prime importance and, AFTER ALL, nothing is easier to write about than this business of HIGH politics.

Next Tuesday week I shall have finished an article on the 'ORIENTAL CHURCH', and next Friday week the first of three articles on Denmark where next month the various assemblies of estates will be again taking the stage.433

Should there be any military MOVEMENT, I shall count on receiving immediate information from the Ministry of Warb in Manchester, and the same applies to COTTONS and YARNS which are wretchedly covered by the papers down here.

Above all I want to slay the fellows with my pen, the moment being propitious, and if at the same time you keep me supplied with material, I can spin out the various themes over longer periods. What is more, without my secretaryc I feel a little nervous about my English.

No regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 27 September - b i.e. Engels - c Pieper



