---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "189. Marx to Engels. 12 October "
Page_Range: "420-422"
---

# 189. Marx to Engels. 12 October 



**[p. 387]**

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t i m e

189

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 October 1853

Dear Engels,

£2 received. It was all the more welcome as Oxford, Freiligrath's principal, is not yet back from his travels, and thus the matter has been delayed.b

READY for Friday.0 Article III, the final one, which covers the period 1848-53, calls for so many Blue Books and PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES that I can't possibly have it ready by Tuesday,' particularly with Sunday FALLING OUT AS FAR AS THE BRITISH MUSEUM IS CONCERNED. So it would be of enormous use to me and would also save me time if you could supply me with something for Tuesday. But what? I really don't know. Perhaps current affairs, to which I would simply ap- p e n d the most recent news. Perhaps, if you have kept u p with the subject—not very much is WANTED FOR MESSRS GREELEY AND M C ELRATH — t h e influence of the impending crisis on DOING AWAY WITH THE BONAPARTE REGIME. I think it high time that attention was drawn to France where, after all, the catastrophe will break out. Failure of

[^1]: As regards the Tribune, I shall have Article II on Palmerston c

[^2]: a A. Cluss, 'Das "beste Blatt der Union" und seine "besten Männer" und Nationalökonomen', Die Reform, Nos. 48-51, 14, 17, 21 and 24 September 1853. - b See this volume, p. 385. - c K. Marx, 'Lord Palmerston', Art. II sent on 14 October was published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3916, 4 November 1853 as a leading article under the title 'II. Palmerston and Russia'. - d 14 October - e 18 October





**[p. 388]**

PRESSURE of the government on the Bank. Tax collector mulcting the land more rigorously than ever. Vast difference between the advance estimates and the actual budget. All municipal administra- tions atrociously in debt—because PROSPERITY has to be propped up. Then the influence of the ORIENTAL QUESTION on FUNDS, with the court itself dangerously exploiting fluctuations in the stocks. DÉMORALISA TION of the army. Special stress should be laid on the fact that none of the manifestos, proclamations, etc., by Ledru, L. Blanc and other kindred spirits of all complexions have succeeded in removing the evil, whereas the social and economic crisis is setting the whole caboodle in motion, etc. etc. I don't know, of course, whether the subject will appeal to you. At any rate let me know whether or not I can expect an articulum* by Tuesday, so that I can act accordingly.440

Your

K. M.

In last week's Economist—(Saturday's, so really this week's) there's all sorts of stuff in its Paris Correspondence.b

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- schen F. Enget und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a article - b 'Foreign Correspondence', The Economist, No. 528, 8 October 1853.



