---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "190. Marx to Karl Blind. 13 October "
Page_Range: "422-423"
---

# 190. Marx to Karl Blind. 13 October 



**[p. 190]**

MARX TO KARL BLIND

IN LONDON

London, 13 October 1853 28 [Dean Street], Soho

Dear Blind,

Immediately after you called on me, I went to see Freiligrath in order to secure his good offices in getting my bill discounted. Freiligrath did indeed undertake to do this, but has so far not managed to arrange the thing since his principal*—whom he needs for the transaction and who has been expected back these past 8-10 days—has not yet returned. Thus I am sans sousb— although I have almost £30 to draw. Yet the thing must be settled within a few days.

As I was unable to obtain this money against my bill, I looked round elsewhere so that I could send you the £1 forthwith, but was everywhere met with a snub.

So, like myself, you will have to be patient for a few days and will, I am sure, realise that nothing could be more vexing to me than my present inability to settle the matter immediately.

Quant à° Jones, I can't understand anything. Since you were here he has been to see me twice and positively assured me he had written to you. It's not his way to lie about such things. Can his letter have been intercepted? He'll be here again tomorrow, when I shall get him to write to you in my presence. Then I shall myself take the letter to the post. He is leaving on Monday.d

Warm regards to you and your wife.

Your

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in International Review for Printed according to the original Social History, Vol. IV, Leiden, 1939 r , r. Published m English tor the first time

[^2]: a Oxford - b penniless - c As for - d 17 October. See this volume, p. 378.



