---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "191. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 18 October "
Page_Range: "423-426"
---

# 191. Marx to Adolf Cluss. 18 October 



**[p. 191]**

MARX T O ADOLF CLUSS

IN WASHINGTON

London, 18 October 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Cluss,

You really did [] too much in going to the trouble of copying out the Chinese thing.3 A T THOSE EXPENSES I would certainly not have had the impertinence to ask you for the article.442 Dana copied my stuff almost word for word, watering down this and that and, with rare tact, deleting anything of an audacious nature. NEVER MIND. IT IS A BUSINESS OF HIS. NOT OF MINE. In one of my Indian articles he also amended the bit where I speak of cholera as 'THE INDIANS REVENGE UPON THE WESTERN WORLD' to 'INDIA'S RAVAGES' which is nonsense. En passant^ Freiligrath solicited that 'revenge' for a poem about cholera upon which he is still at work.

My wife has also compromised me by putting Rinaldo for Ruggiero and Alcide for Alcinee in the first article on Palmerston. These are 'les petites misères'f of an écrivain8 whose own handwriting is illegible.443 But it's a bitter pill for a man who knows his Ariosto from A to Z in the original. Divinoh Ariosto! It's a big j u m p from Ariosto to Klein, or rather a long fall, and a casus obliquus' at that. Papa Klein wrote to m e — n o t a word, of course, about his upsets and rows—asking for recommendations to you and Weydemeyer. In my reply (Pieper has not written him a single line quant à vous') I did not, of course, in any way suggest

[^1]: Again, in another of my articles on I n d i a / dealing with the princes there, he transmogrified 'THE SKELETON OF ETIQUETTE' into 'THE SECLUSION (PITIFUL!) OF ETIQUETTE'. NEVER MIND! Provided he pays.

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Revolution in China and in Europe'. - b K. Marx, 'The War Question.—Doings of Parliament.—India' (see present edition, Vol. 12, p. 216). -

[^3]: c By the way - d K. Marx, 'The Russo-Turkish Difficulty.—Ducking and Dodging of the British Cabinet.—Nesselrode's Last Note.—The East India Question' (see present edition, Vol. 12, p. 200). - e Rinaldo Rinaldino—title character in the novel by August Vulpius; Ruggiero and Alcina—characters in L'Orlando furioso by Ariosto. - ' little miseries - f? writer - h sublime - ' oblique fall. A pun, the Ger- man word Fall meaning either 'fall' or 'case'. - > concerning you





**[p. 391]**

Klein really does wield some influence over the Solingen workers, and they are the best in the Rhine province. I, pour ma part,d have never, either d r u n k or sober, expressed the view that the workers are fit only for cannonfodder, although the louts, among whom little Klein e is evidently coming to rank himself, are, to my mind, barely fit even for that. It would be as well to treat little Klein with your accustomed DISCRETION as a tool that may perhaps (?), IN TIME OF ACTION, be of use to us.

Have forwarded the letter to Pieper. There's nothing doing with the Gradaus for it doesn't pay, and Pieper is too badly off to write gratis.

As regards the Reform, I shall see what I can get the others to do. T h e only one from whom any real support can be expected is Engels. Red Wolfff is married and a retailer of HOUSEHOLD WORDS for Prutz, Gutzkow and Cotta, not worth a FARTHING to us just now. Lupus no longer writes; he's so obstinate that he cannot be made to forget the unfortunate business of Weydemeyer's Revolution.2

Dronke, presently a clerk in Bradford, idle as a grisette. Weerth, travelling about South and North America on business for nearly a year now. Engels really has too much work, but being a veritable walking encyclopaedia, he's capable, drunk or sober, of working at any hour of the day or night, is a fast writer and devilish QUICK in the uptake, so he at least can be expected to do something in this respect.

I was greatly tickled by Heinzen's heroic deed. Should you people give the fellow another dressing down, concentrate on his crass ignorance, and the pains the wretched man is at to

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 365. - b Cf. Marx to Joseph Weydemeyer, 19 December 1851, present edition, Vol. 38, p. 519. - c Klein, ironically called Snug after a character in Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream. - d for my part - e A play on the words klein (little) and Klein (personal name). - f Ferdinand Wolff





**[p. 392]**

Rent In the Misère" I cite an example of how in England, land which, at a certain stage of science, was regarded as barren, is, at a more advanced stage, considered fertile. I can adduce as a general fact that, throughout the middle ages, esp. in Germany, heavy clay soil was cultivated by preference as being naturally more fertile. In the past 4-5 decades, however, owing to the introduction of potatoes, sheep-farming and the resulting manuring, etc., light sandy soil has taken pride of place, esp. since it involves no EXPENSES OF DRAINAGE, etc., and on the other hand its deficiencies can easily be made good by means of chemical fertilisers. From this, then, it may be seen how relative 'fertility' is, even 'natural' fertility, and at the same time how ill-informed Mr Carey is, even from the point of view of history, when he expresses the opinion that the most barren land is always the first to be brought under cultivation.b

What leads him to that conclusion? The fact that tropical swamps are damned fertile but reclaimable only by civilisation. A tropical swamp, however, is productive not so much of herbs as of weeds. Civilisation clearly originates in those regions where wheat grows wild, as was the case in part of Asia Minor, etc. Such land is rightly described as naturally fertile by historians—and not land yielding poisonous vegetation and requiring more strenuous cultivation if it is to become fertile for human beings. Fertility is not, after all, absolute but merely a relation of the land to human requirements.

Ricardo's law only holds good within bourgeois society. Hence it is where the relationship of the bourgeois to the land is purely that of a bourgeois, and every peasant,—or feudal—or patriarchal, relationship is cast aside that the law applies in its purest form, hence above all in the mining of precious metals, and in colonies where commercial crops, e.g. sugar, coffee, etc., are grown. More about this another time. In both instances the exploitation of the land is regarded and pursued by the bourgeois de prime abordc as a purely commercial concern.

Though I'm not afraid of those curs of Russians in so far as

[^1]: a K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the 'Philosophy of Poverty' by M. Proudhon. - b H. Ch. Carey, The Past, the Present, and the Future, Philadelphia, 1848, pp. 48-49. - c first and foremost



