---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "192. Marx to Engels. 28 October "
Page_Range: "426-428"
---

# 192. Marx to Engels. 28 October 



**[p. 393]**

Herewith copy of The People's Paper.

Vale faveque*

Your

K. M.

First published in part in: Marx and Printed according to the original Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, ,. , . , r. Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 and Voprosy Published m English for the first istorii KPSS, No. 3, Moscow, 1962 and in t i m e

full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981

192

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 28 October 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

Mes remerciements pour les deux articles.d I fear you have been too biassed by Mr Smitte in favour of Russia's military achievements. D'abord J as regards the 1828-29 campaign, it was a wretched affair in the opinion of most contemporains%; I base myself inter alia, on the REPORT submitted to the Duke of Wellington by his ADC and published in The Portfolio.h The fortresses were bought rather than stormed. In general, BRIBERY played a major role in the campaign.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Marx used this word for French philistines. - b Good-bye and farewell. - c The original is kept in the Marx Memorial House in Trier. - ° My thanks for the two articles (F. Engels, 'Movements of the Armies in Turkey' and 'The Holy War'). - e F. Smitt, Geschichte des polnischen Aufstandes und Krieges in den Jahren 1830

[^3]: und 1831. - f To begin with - 8 contemporaries - h F. R. Chesney, 'Précis of a Report on the Russian Campaign of 1828 and 1829, drawn up for the information of the Duke of Wellington', The Portfolio, No. 26, 20 July 1836.





**[p. 394]**

Over the past 2 weeks the Débats has been publishing articles on the campaigns of '28-'29, which, however, I have not read. I shall look out further material at the library.

Pieper has been out of hospital for a week—and is doubly occupied, 1. as correspondent of the Washington Union, arranged by Cluss and 2. as CLERK (from 9-5) at 25/- A WEEK with a crapaud3 in the City. Hence of no further use to me. Tant mieuxh for him. I'm glad he's out of the mire.

I am sending you the continuation of the Palmerston.c Jones has asked me for the next instalment. I have sent an article for this once d

but with the proviso that he would get no more if he didn't put an end to the abominable printing errors (this time glaring to the point of distortion). The manuscript was written very neatly.

Rings, stricken by madness, has spent several days in the WORKHOUSE and is still in a critical condition. Drink was to blame, quorum magna parse the merry-making Lupus who debauched him with gin AFTER HE HAD SHUT UP HIS SHOP. Withal the man's too full-blooded to remain idle and has not yet succeeded in finding any fresh occupation. It's damnable the way the fellows all go mad on us.

Herewith Heinzen's tour de force.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t i m e

[^2]: a philistine - b So much the better - c K. Marx, Article III of the 'Palmerston' series: 'A Chapter of Modern History', New-York Daily Tribune. - d K. Marx, 'Lord Palmerston', Art. Ill, The People's Paper. - e a large part being played by Virgil, Aeneid, II) '



