---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "194. Marx to Engels. 6 November "
Page_Range: "429-430"
---

# 194. Marx to Engels. 6 November 

The New-York Enquirer, edited by General Webb (I haven't read the article myself), has attacked the Tribune LEADER got from you.a

The thing, it says, is scientifically correct, but a Turkish war is waged according to different principles. Turks would go into the attack whatever the circumstances, etc.

How is the Factory Pro-le-ta-ri-at doing?

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, ig 13 Published in English for the first time

194

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 November [1853] 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Herewith the great Karl Heinzen's invective against myself and communism in his Herold des Westens.

Also a letter from Cluss. From it you will see that Willich's fiery rocketb is arriving by the next post. The worst of it is that the fellows will be peddling their lampoon throughout the whole of Germany while my pamphletc reposes quietly in Manchester and London—and that in Heinzen they once more possess a vocifer- ous sounding-board, whereas a few months ago the only organ at Willich's disposal was the Criminal-Zeitung. When the trash arrives I shall let you have it immediately, so that you can write and tell me what you think we ought to do.

[^1]: You will see from Cluss' letter how things stand with the Reform.445 Get the 'old man'd and Dronke to write for it. They have

[^2]: a F. Engels, 'The Russians in Turkey'. - b A. Willich, 'Doctor Karl Marx und seine "Enthüllungen"', Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, Nos. 33 and 34, 28 October and 4 November 1853. - c K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. - d Wilhelm Wolff



