---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "195. Marx to Adolf Cluss. Mid- November "
Page_Range: "430-431"
---

# 195. Marx to Adolf Cluss. Mid- November 



**[p. 397]**

Weerth's letter horriblement insipid, despite all his striving after wit.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stutteart 1913 Published in English for the first time

195

MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS446

IN WASHINGTON

[London, mid-November 1853]

 As regards the Reform, I shall see what can be done in Germany and Paris. Pieper is now in business and spends from 9 in the morning until 8 at night in the City. So what with his work as correspondent for the Union, has little time. He'll do something. If any money is forthcoming, I would suggest that Eccarius get some first so that he doesn't have to spend all day tailoring. In accordance with an agreement made with me, he will now be sending articles regularly. Do try and see that he gets something, if at all possible. With regard to his French articles, Jones is no longer printing them,447 nor has he returned me the manuscript, which isn't therefore available dans ce moment,* Jones being away on an agitation tour. I have written to him about it, however.448 I have also asked Heise. Diversity is desirable and, by consorting with us Heise will, I believe, change for the better. I have asked Lupus and Dronke through Engels. Probably little will come of it. In Lupus' case, age and bachelorhood combine to lead him into mischief during this sorry interregnum.

Not yet seen Willich's damp squib.c The war news takes up almost my whole attention and there's no time left to think about the great Willich. Despite the electric telegraph, the NEWS arrives late, is very confused and fragmentary and has, moreover, all

[^1]: a at the moment - b See this volume, p. 396. - c A. Willich, 'Doctor Karl Marx und seine "Enthüllungen" '.



