---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "196. Marx to Engels. 21 November "
Page_Range: "431-432"
---

# 196. Marx to Engels. 21 November 



**[p. 8]**

Quant àa Willich, I should much prefer it if I could be spared personal statements and my contribution be confined to produc- ing, for the feuilleton of the Reform, a psychological—or rather, phenomenological—genre picture of this shabby philistine's 'form of consciousness'.

Last Tuesday,b at the same time as your letter, I received one from Klein which was, I must say, most delightfully written, witty and considered. He tells me that he, too, will make a statement against Willich, since he can prove that the man was a fraud all the time he was in London. Klein is obsessed with the idea that you people are treating him very much de haut en bas. I shall try and smooth out this difference.

As regards the Tribune, the most ingenious way of handling the thing might have been to make people believe they 'recognised my style'.449 I have become very thick with Urquhart as a result of the Palmerston article.0 To help me, he has sent me several books—with which, however, I was already familiar450

First published in Voprosy istorii KPSS, Printed according to a letter from No. 3, Moscow, 1962 Cluss to Weydemeyer of 7 De- cember 1853

196

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 21 November 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

Herewith a £2 postal order for Lupus, which I have received for him from Cluss, N.B. in response to my request. Also Willich's exceedingly sorry scrawl.d

[^1]: Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a As regards - b Probably November. - c K. Marx, 'Lord Palmerston'. - d A. Willich, 'Doctor Karl Marx und seine "Enthüllungen"'.



