---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "197. Marx to Engels. 23 November : "
Page_Range: "432-433"
---

# 197. Marx to Engels. 23 November : 

Thanks for the Turkish article.0 When it arrived, news of the Turkish retreat had already reached me, and I altered the thing accordingly. Do write; it's a month since you answered any of my letters with more than half a dozen lines.451

Your

K. M.

Won't you come up to town for Christmas and put up here} I now have a small room for you. You might be able to shake off the old man d for once.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

197

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 23 November 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

The People's Paper had been overlooked. Enclosed herewith. The five articles that have so far appeared in Jones' paper have been compressed in the Tribune into three."

Whatever calls there may be on your time, I must ask you to let me have for Friday1 at least 2 of (your usual) pages—more is

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a 25 November - b K. Marx, 'The Knight of the Noble Consciousness'. - c F. Engels, 'The Progress of the Turkish War'. - d Wilhelm Wolff - e K. Marx, 'Lord Palmerston', I-V in The People's Paper, corresponding to T. Palmerston', 'II. Palmerston and Russia' and 'III. A Chapter of Modern History' in the New-York Daily Tribune. - f Engels' article 'The War on the Danube' was sent to New York on Friday, 2 December 1853.



