---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "198. Marx to Engels. 2 December "
Page_Range: "433-435"
---

# 198. Marx to Engels. 2 December 



**[p. 400]**

The Willich mess calls for speed—in direct contrast to his six months of shilly-shallying.3

Your

K. M.

Did the 'old man'b get the postal order for £2?

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, ,. , , , , . , . , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the f.rst Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

198

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 2 December 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

That you should be coming here452 mainly to frequent the philistines again, pleases me not at all.

and gives you to understand that both have gone to me—have had neither. See to it that the LITTLE MAN returns you the newspapers, at

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: Mes remerciements pour lec BEAUTIFUL ARTICLE.0 In America Mr Dana will be making himself a name as a field marshal.

[^3]: Mr Dronke is behaving like a wretched little mischief-monger. He tells Strohn he has sent you his statement and the newspaper,6

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 396, 397 and 398. - b Wilhelm Wolff - c Thanks for the - d F. Engels, 'The War on the Danube'. - e Belletristisches Journal und New- Yorker Criminal-Zeitung containing Willich's article 'Doctor Karl Marx und seine "Enthüllungen"'.





**[p. 401]**

On Tuesday0 I sent off my rejoinder, The Knight of the Noble Consciousness. He'sd in for a surprise. Your letter454 and others from Steffen, Miskowsky (together with Kossuth's testimony),455

etc., all of them, of course, with your signatures, were included as integral parts of the whole.

Write soon. Jones is under attack from The Economist'' and is acquiring fame.

Apropos. Last Tuesday a Polish meeting.456 Mazzini and Kossuth didn't come. Inane blather from Worcell. Ruge and Ledru showed themselves worthy of the company. My wife was there/ Also at Monday's meeting held by Poles of the democratic variety. It was announced that Harney was to be in the chair. Fearsome revolt by the 50 or 60 English working men present. Hisses, TRAITOR-, •DRYBONES' (as he called the Chartists), RENEGADE. A fearsome set-to. Harney did not dare take the CHAIR, was terribly mauled, buffeted, abused and, despite half a dozen attempts, never managed to speak. Needless to say, the stupid Waschlapskisg couldn't under- stand what was going on and interpreted the whole thing as 'reaction'. This spells Nemesis for Father George Julian Harney.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: a at least - b now - c 29 November - d Willich - e 'The Labour Parliament', The Economist, No. 535, 26 November 1853. - f See this volume, p. 587. - s Marx calls the petty-bourgeois émigrés who attended the Polish meeting of 29 November 1853 'Waschlapskis' (Dishcloths) after a personage in Heine's satirical poem 'Zwei Ritter'.



