---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "199. Marx to Engels. About 12 December "
Page_Range: "435-436"
---

# 199. Marx to Engels. About 12 December 

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 t l m e

199

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, about 12 December 1853]

Dear Engels,

From the telegram I received from you this morning I naturally cannot tell:

1. Whether Cluss', etc., answers'1 and the issues of the Reform relating to Williche have reached you from New York. The contrary would seem possible, since Mr Lupus, in a fatuous letter to Cluss, seeks to conceal his laziness by inveighing against Weydemeyer.

2. Has Dronke returned the relevant numbers of the Criminal- Zeitung1} I asked Steffen to get you to send them to him in Chester, since I can't do without the one copy I have down here. When—induced by you—I came in my last letter8 to speak of the odd affair of 'the well-known gentleman, Dr Dronke's' statement, it occurred to me that the immediate upshot would be that I would get no private letters from you until the affair could be assumed to have blown over—say a week or two. At least, that is the method which, since Mr Lupus' arrival in Manchester, you have adhered to with unusual consistency in all matters concerning

[^1]: 3 Cluss to Marx, 13 November 1853. - b J. Weydemeyer, A. Cluss, A. Jacobi, 'An die Redaktion der New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung', Belletristisches Journal und New- Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 37, 25 November 1853. - c K. Marx, 'The Knight of the Noble Consciousness'. - d See previous letter. - e 'Werbungen in New-York', 'Das Wirken der "Militär Kommission"', Die Reform, Nos. 87 and 88, 19 and 21 November 1853. - f containing Willich's 'Doctor Karl Marx und seine "Enthül- lungen"' - 8 See this volume, pp. 400-01.



