---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "201. Marx to Engels. 5 January "
Page_Range: "439-440"
---

# 201. Marx to Engels. 5 January 



**[p. 1854]**

201

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 January 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Since the day you left,461 the whole FAMILY has been prostrated by influenza, etc. Musch and I are still very much down. Thus through physical causes I have already been cheated of 3 articles for the Tribune which, considering the weather, is dur.* Let me know if you can provide me with one article for next week, on any subject you like. But I must know for certain if and when.h

Being still confined to my room, I have not, of course, been able to keep up with the newspapers. Pieper tells me that in today's Morning Herald there is a long article on the Russian plan of campaign^ The main theatre to be Asia, not Europe. They proposed to take Constantinople from the direction of Asia Minor (!) etc., etc.

Three volumes of Joseph Bonaparte's Memoirs^ have so far come out. The third contains the old Napoleon's correspondence on the Peninsular campaign.462

Just now I was interrupted by Musch, who is raving and thrashing about, etc., in a high fever. I hope the little man will soon recover.

[^1]: a hard - b In compliance with Marx's request Engels wrote 'The European War' on 8 January. - c J. B. Slick, 'To the Editor of The Morning Herald', The Morning Herald, No. 22361, 5 January 1854. - d J. Bonaparte, Mémoires et correspondance politique et militaire du roi Joseph.



