---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "203. Marx to Engels. 18 January "
Page_Range: "441-443"
---

# 203. Marx to Engels. 18 January 

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

203

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 January 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

You must let me have by Fridaya something of a general nature (it is hardly possible to be specific) about the Battle of Citale or Zitale.b It seems to me that:

1. The battle of Oltenitza was a misunderstanding which frustrated the armistice imposed by the Ambassadors on the Porte. Similarly the Battle of Citatea4 was a misunderstanding which frustrated the peace proposals dictated to the Porte under the guns of the English warships.

2. The obverse of Oltenitza. In the one case the Turks entrenched, in the other the Russians, etc.

3. Same result. After a murderous set-to lasting five days, the fellows drew in their respective horns. All I see is the result. I don't know what should have happened. All I do know is that this is not the way Napoleon fought a war.

So enmeshed in their own webs have the diplomatic intriguers become that a guerre générale11 is imminent. As you know, the EVENT AT Sinope—not to mention Mr Redcliffe's threats—was intended to induce the Turks to accept the Protocol of Vienna and bring Halil and Riza Pasha into the government.467 Once all this had

[^1]: a 20 January. - b Marx took the wrong spelling from the English newspapers; should be Citatea as below. - c general war





**[p. 409]**

My brother-in-law—le ministre3—wrote and told my mother-in- law11 that she was unfortunately about to relive her experience of 40 years ago, namely a general war.4 '

will be rejected, as The Times has had orders to refrain from any semblance of anti-Bonaparte polemics. Since he is 'our' ally, every paper will be moved by the same patriotic considerations just now. Anyway, as soon as the thing is ready, and if the papers won't have it, we shall bring it out as a pamphlet. Where my own work is concerned, I feel embarrassed about offering it to a publisher. The same gênec would not apply to yours.

That jackass Weydemeyer has again shelved 'the noble con- sciousness'.'1 The main thing was speed in answering. 6 weeks too late, and the thing's SILLY. I cannot understand Cluss, and why he should always pick on me of all people to be Mr Weydemeyer's victim.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: I forwarded your letter to Steffen472 the same day to Brussels where Steffen is still staying with his sister. I fear that, at this particular juncture, your 'Napoleon as Lieutenant of Artillery'473

[^2]: a Ferdinand von Westphalen - b Caroline von Westphalen - c embarrassment - d K. Marx, 'The Knight of the Noble Consciousness'.



