---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "204. Marx to Engels. 25 January "
Page_Range: "443-445"
---

# 204. Marx to Engels. 25 January 



**[p. 410]**

SMALL WIT'

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English for the tirst time

204

MARX T O ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 January 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

Enclosed note for Lupus, who has written to me.474 Absolution.b

As to the war, there will now be some snags, unless MISUNDER- STANDINGS' OCCUR that have nothing to do with, or r u n counter to, diplomacy. Reshid Pasha's Note 4 spells total SURRENDER TO RUSSIA. It even contains more concessions than the ORIGINAL VIENNA NOTE as a result of which Turkey declared war.476 Palmerston has not returned to office in vain.c O n the other hand, the demonstration in the BLACK SEA would seem to be a DODGE, specially contrived for the MEETING of Parliament: if Russia accepts her own con- ditions incorporated in Reshid's Note and obtains everything she has demanded, she will appear to have bowed to force supérieure. That, in any case, is the plan. Otherwise, would it not be absurd to inform Nicholas of the entry of the UNITED FLEETS before h e had, or could have, pronounced upon the last VIENNA NOTE? Now only an accident of war could bring about a warlike solution. By prior agreement the Czar, far from objecting to the ENTRANCE OF THE UNITED SQUADRON, showed considerable TEMPER.477

[^1]: However, there's no vouching for MISUNDERSTANDINGS'. They ARE EVER

[^2]: PROBABLE.

[^3]: Today's Times contains a further report from the Wanderer on T h e Battle of Citatea.d I EXPECT YOUR OBSERVATIONS. T h e advance the

[^4]: a Postscript in a childish hand. - b See this volume, p. 386. - c ibid., p. 409. - d 'Krajova, Lesser Wallachia. Jan. 11', The Times, No. 21647, 25 January 1854.





**[p. 411]**

It is scandalous that Berlin is not being fortified. My brother-in-law, le ministre, has written to my mother-in-law warning her that now, in her ripe old age, she is about to go through the same experience as in the days of Napoleon I.b He believes, then, that there'll be war.

Cobden, the 'UMBLE- and HOMELY MAW made a considerable ass of himself in his last speech. He demonstrates that neither he nor the 'UMBLE MEN- who applaud him, are competent to govern England. The Quaker Bright will hear of nothing but the war within. Cobden's discovery that the social structure of England and Russia are analogous because there are Demidovs there and Derbys here, is worthy of a Palatinate revolutionary philistine from Neustadt.478

On Saturday Mr Pieper went to visit Meyer in Brighton. Unwelcome though he is to the latter, he is overstaying the time allotted him by Troupeau, because the 'sea air' suits him, and has, it seems, written the bourgeois a fatuous letter. The silly lad mistakes his lack of principles for genial high spirits. From Cluss' letter479 you will see that this same 'genial' youth wanted to obtain an American passport to Constantinople, probably in the hope of becoming a kennelboy there. It's triste" that the lad should be so thoroughly pleased with himself as to do one silly thing after another and make a laughing-stock of himself.

On Tuesday0 Bischoffsheim will be paying me another bill through Freiligrath. In the meantime I can't raise a penny, having exhausted the possibilities of the pawnbrokers, as is regularly the case. So if you could lay your hands on £1, it would be HIGHLY DESIRABLE. Moreover, 100 copies of the 'noble consciousness'e will be

[^1]: a [Report from Constantinople of 2 January 1854,] La Patrie, No. 19, 19 January 1854. - b See this volume, p. 409. - c sad - <* 31 January - e K. Marx, 'The Knight of the Noble Consciousness'.



