---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "205. Marx to Engels. 9 February "
Page_Range: "445-446"
---

# 205. Marx to Engels. 9 February 

Apropos. I am negotiating with Tucker. The next pamphlet is to be about Unkiar-Skelessi. So correct the stuff you've got (Nos. IV and V).480 I shall then make sundry additions and send back the ALTERATIONS for you to look through.

I have received through Dana an offer from a magazine in New York, £12 per sheet, for articles on the history of German phi- losophy from Kant TILL NOW.481 But they must: 1. be sarcastic and amusing; 2. contain nothing AGAINST THE RELIGIOUS FEELINGS OF THE COUNTRY. How to set about it? Now, if we 2 were together—books would be needed besides—we could quickly earn £50-£60. I wouldn't dare attempt the work on my own.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, „ ,,. , . . „ ,. , , Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

205

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 9 February 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Frederic,

I shall be sending you today, at the same time as this, a few copies of the 'Knight'" and three copies of the 2nd edition of the Polish rubbish,482 which I have corrected. Give one copy of each to Lupus and Dronke. It was stupid of me not to have corrected the printing errors (Weydemeyer also contributes his fair share) in the Syrian Palmerston thingb before sending it to you.483

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: I had a meeting with Urquhart.484 He surprised me with the compliment that the articles0 read as though written by a 'Turk',

[^3]: a K. Marx, 'The Knight of the Noble Consciousness'. - b K. Marx, 'Lord Palmer- ston', Fourth Article in The People's Paper. - c K. Marx, 'Lord Palmerston'.



