---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "207. Marx to Engels. 9 March "
Page_Range: "447-451"
---

# 207. Marx to Engels. 9 March 

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

207

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 March 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I have not written for a long time because I have had a great deal of TROUBLE at home which has even prevented me from reading the papers properly, so that I don't know whether anything of yours has yet appeared in The Daily News or how the whole thing is going.3

As yet I have got nothing, i.e. not a single farthing, out of my 'Palmerston', nor does there seem to be any prospect of my doing so. Mr Trübner has himself told me that, quant a lui,b it is a PRINCIPLE of his never to pay for the stuff he publishes. Moreover, the thing's out of date au momenta

I am faced with the repulsive prospect of enduring throughout the spring and summer the same chronic pressure as in previous years, since it is not possible for me to work off past debts with the

[^1]: On Tuesday11 I shall send the last of the sample articles to the Cape.486 (So you must let me have something for the Tribune, PERHAPS THE GREEK REVOLUTION?)48' Tuesday will be the last day of regular sailings to the Cape, since the company has fallen out with the government over charges.

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 404. - b as for him - c by now - d 14 March



&

—.stum*

3^

[^1]: K A t « * » A M * « - « .

[^2]: Military road from Constantinople to Nissa (lithographic sketch). Roman figures were written in by Marx







**[p. 417]**

You have not returned Lassalle's letter as you indicated you had in your last.488 I don't need it but only want to be sure that it hasn't gone astray in the post or fallen into the wrong hands.

I have received an invitation from the LABOUR PARLIAMENT489 to sit as HONORARY DELEGATE in Manchester (Nadaud and Louis Blanc likewise). I wrote today, thanking them for it, and made a few remarks which, according to how they are construed, could be either very extreme or very moderate." I sent Jones your office address today.

The great Ruge intends to found a university (a free one) in America and, as Heinzen announces, 150 dollars has already been collected for this noble purpose.

The great Franz Sigel has become Dulon's son-in-law. What else has been happening among that crew you will discover from a parcel which will descend on you in a few days' time.

In yesterday's Advertiser there was a military (?) article by Urquhartb in which he maintains that the Turks should have sent their main army to the Dobrudja and assaulted the Russians from there. Cites General Valentini. I shall make sure to send you the issue.

I have written to Lassalle490 and await further communications from him.

Tzschirner came to see me, didn't find me in, is going to America on a financial matter with his 80-year-old mother and will then settle over here. Claims he already knows you, or so Imandt says.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published much abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First time Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Letter to the Labour Parliament'. - b D. Urquhart, 'What the Governments of England and Turkey Ought Severally to Do. To the Editor of The Morning Advertiser', The Morning Advertiser, No. 19566, 8 March 1854.



