---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Marx. 3 April "
Page_Range: "459-461"
---

# 213. Engels to Marx. 3 April 



**[p. 426]**

Should you deem this proceeding too systematical, the account of Kronstadt might be followed up by a similar one of the permanent fortifications of Sevastopol and the other Russian fortified harbours (wherever obtainable), to be concluded by some observations on the chances of naval attacks against land batteries, drawn from history and from the best theoretical sources such as Sir Howard Douglas/

If you require reviews of military works, I could also undertake them. For instance Col. Chesney's Russo-Turkish Campaigns; for this book I am, I may say, admirably provided with materials.

I conclude this lengthy epistle in offering you, also, a few remarks on the importance or rather non-importance of the Russian passage across the Danube: these are at your service at a moment's notice.

If you take my offer into consideration, I shall be glad to receive a few lines as soon as possible so as to be enabled to set to work at once. In the meantime, etc.

213

ENGELS TO MARX

^ Manchester, 3 April 1854 Dear Marx,

The crossing of the Danube is of a purely defensive nature. It is proof that the Russians are withdrawing from the greater part of Wallachia. They have had 7 infantry divisions in Wallachia, one in

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a H. Douglas, A Treatise on Naval Gunnery, London, 1820.



Things seem to be working out with The Daily News. I didn't write until last week,3 after I had observed the English proprieties by obtaining a REFERENCE from father Watts, who also writes for it (father Watts, BY THE BY, has given up his SHOP and is now MANAGING DIRECTOR of a PEOPLES PROVIDENT ASSURANCE CO. in which capacity he will shortly be setting himself up in your vicinity, 47 Charing Cross [Road]. He and all his officials are letting their beards grow and look like Wasserpolacken604). Today I've had a letter from the CHIEF EDITOR, Lincoln, who seems altogether agreeable (I had offered to start off with articles on the Russian army, navy and fortifications), and he is eager for me to send him the articles.505 So I don't feel at all nervous. That the fellows are in a quandary as regards things military is evident from their acceptance of Schimmelpfen- nigian nonsense of a kind totally incomprehensible to anyone unacquainted with Billow's books, and my racily written and unlaboured letter will have opened up for them prospects of quite a different order. Once they have got interested in my stuff (N.B. I asked for money straight away), I intend really to impress the jackasses. Tomorrow I shall send them something no one else can provide: plans of Hirsova, Matchin, Isaktsha and Tultsha. This business has really taken a load off my mind, for a source of cash

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 423-26.



