---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "214. Marx to Engels. 4 April "
Page_Range: "461-463"
---

# 214. Marx to Engels. 4 April 



**[p. 428]**

Needless to say, Lupus had been out drinking with us. As usual, staggers off tight as a drum so that there's no holding him, loses his way, finds himself in a low pub at the opposite end of the town from where he lives. Treats 6 maquereaux3 and 2 whores who were at the bar, shows his shekels, exits followed by the maquereaux, and so on. That's his ACCOUNT. However, there's more to the matter than meets the eye; for instance, on coming to his senses he didn't go home but went off with an Englishman, a total stranger, who put him up (not 200 paces from his lodgings) moyennant one shilling. In short, il y a là des choses que M. Lupus veut cacher, sans doute quelque vieille fille?

The story of the Russians' boulets asphyxiants0 is nonsense. The French have something of the kind, but it doesn't destroy ships, merely kills people. You might send me Hammer some time, particularly about the more recent times. About Urquhart one of these days. It's bad luck about Pieper. As regards the money you can, of course, dispose of it as you please. / don't give a damn whether my brother-in-law' gets it or not.

Your • F. E.

214

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 4 April 1854 ^ [28 Dean Street, Soho] Dear Engels,

From Cluss' letter, enclosed herewith,506 you will see what a worthy trick has been played on him by Dr Kellner and friend Weydemeyer. The latter, instead of enlightening him as to the

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t l m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: a pimps - b at a charge of - c there are things here that Mr Lupus wants to hide, doubtless some old maid - d asphyxiating shot (see this volume, pp. 422- 23) - e Emil Blank



I am delighted about The Daily News. I shall have a look today and see if they've published anything yet. I HOPE. SIR. YOU WILL LEAVE MANCHESTER, SIR, FOR EVER. SIR. One gets horribly used to this SIR (or rather SAR!) when one is compelled to read the parliamentary debates each week, especially THE SPEECHES OF Lord John Russell. The fellow can be boiled down to just the 2 words: 'Now, SAR!'

As you will see from the enclosed, Pieper has received his first bill from Washington, and yesterday evening again acquired lodgings of his own. He now struts around like a turkeycock. Not only earns money, but as an author, and not only as an author, but as a politician! For the time being he has, or at least pretends to have, forsworn London's public PETTICOATS and is on the look-out for some healthy paramour. Social standing no object. Nor yet, perhaps, age. But health. THAT IS THE THING. Experience has taught the good youth to regard the sex from a medical point of view. Depicted in a state of undress, the good youth might serve as a cautionary example. Now that he's under his own steam again, I have told him about your offer to help him should he get a negative answer or a protested bill from Weydemeyer. There could no longer be any harm in giving him your message, but the good youth who, all things considered, is bon garçon," was deeply impressed.

At this particular juncture, just when you have opened fire in The Daily News, it is vital you shouldn't leave me in the lurch over the Tribune. Otherwise the fellows, nettled as they are by my recent statement,b and likewise readers of The Daily News, might well believe that now—when all the newspapers are anxious to make a splash with their military stuff—I am selling THE BETTER PART OF MYSELF in London and the OFFAL in New York. The fellows would be capable of chucking me out, seeing that they already have one correspondent here and one in Liverpool. Their paper would be somewhat the worse for it, but £200 to the good which, after all, is worth the trouble. Hence what is necessary above all is to tempt them once more into printing a military article as a LEADER. Then I can again be sure of them. In one of its • recent issues the N. Y. Herald ridicules the 'MILITARY EDITOR OF THE TRIBUNE' for prescribing a plan of campaign for Omer Pasha and crying treason now that it is not carried out.

Palmerston in Three Epochs by Washington Wilks. This book

[^1]: a a good lad - b See this volume, p. 422.



