---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "215. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 6 April "
Page_Range: "463-466"
---

# 215. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 6 April 



**[p. 430]**

Your

K. Marx

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

215

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

London, 6 April 1854 (You know the address)

Dear Lassalle,

Your letter of 7 March safely received. I should like to make a few comments, firstly on your military, and secondly on your diplomatic, VIEWS.

ad 1. To my comment508 regarding Enos and Rodosto, you reply—agreeing in this with the English ministerial papers—that

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN DÜSSELDORF

[^2]: a K. Marx, 'Lord Palmerston'.



The notion that a move into Serbia would place the Austrians 'in the rear of the Turkish Army of the Danube' does not seem to me quite correct. The Austrians must make their crossing at Belgrade or not very far below it, or else enter Wallachia via Mehadia along the left bank of the Danube. In the first case they would find themselves in the extension of the Turkish left wing, in the second to the front of it. That this would mean the immediate sacrifice of Kalafat and Vidin, with the exception of the garrison which would remain there, is evident—but not that this Turkish left wing would be lost and its remnants compelled to fall back on the Shumla line. Au contraire? the correct tactics for the Austrians would be to march immediately on Sofia via Nissa, hence the correct tactics for the Turks would be to withdraw from Vidin, likewise to Sofia. Not having so far to go, they would be there before the Austrians and could either make a stand in the Balkans or withdraw towards Adrianople.

Should the Austrians allow themselves to be enticed into marching on Vidin, the Turks would still make for Sofia. This division of Omer Pasha's principal corps would not involve the fragmentation of his forces, since the new enemy would necessitate a new Adrianople-Sofia-Belgrade-Vidin operational line. Thus the Turkish left wing would become an independent army.

Should the strategy you postulate be adopted in spite of all this, no amount of falling back on the Shumla line would avail, for the latte V, having already been outflanked as a result of the sacrifice of the highway from Belgrade to Constantinople, would have to be \ abandoned all the more precipitately in order to assemble all available reserves at Adrianople and advance against the first enemy to pass through the Balkans.

ad 2. Ad vocemc Palmerston. Your view of Palmerston is the one prevailing on the Continent and among the liberal majority of the English public.497 As for myself, I am of the unalterable opinion that Palmerston—en passant Princess Lieven paid his debts for him in 1827, Prince Lieven got him into the FOREIGN OFFICE in 1830 and Canning, on his deathbed, told people to beware of him—is a

[^1]: a See also this volume, p. 419 - b On the contrary - c as for





**[p. 432]**

Palmerston is no genius, a genius would not lend himself to such a role. But he is a most talented man and a consummate tactician. His artistry does not lie in serving Russia, but rather in contriving to maintain the role of a 'TRULY ENGLISH MINISTER' while so engaged. The only difference between him and Aberdeen is that Aberdeen serves Russia because he doesn't understand her, while Palmerston serves her although he does. Hence the first is Russia's avowed partisan, the second her secret agent, the first gratis, the second in return for fees received. Even if he himself now wished to do so, he could not turn against Russia because he is at her mercy and must live in constant fear of being immolated in Petersburg. This is the man who in 1829 condemned Aberdeen's policy as not pro-Russian enough,3 who was told by Robert Peel in the House of Commonsb that he didn't know whose representative he was, who sacrificed the Poles in 1831, who imposed the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi on the Porte in 1833,510 who abandoned the Caucasus and the Danube estuary to Russia in 1836, who engineered the treaties of 1840 and 1841458 and a new Holy Alliance against France, who conducted the Afghan War in the Russian interest,511 who, in 1831, 1836 and 1840, paved the way for the incorporation of Cracow, only to protest against it in 1846, etc.507 No matter what he engaged in, he worked against his country's commercial interests on the pretext of protecting them. E.g., in the matter of Neapolitan sulphur.512 He frustrated advantageous trade agreements which were about to be ratified with France. This is the man who delivered up Italy and Hungary.513 Had he merely worked against revolutionary peoples, it would have been understandable. But in questions involving exclusively British' interests, he invariably contrived in the most

[^1]: a Palmerston, [Speech in the House of Commons on 1 June 1829,] G. H. Francis, Opinions and Policy of the Right Viscount Palmerston, London, 1852, pp. 123- 26. - b Probably Robert Peel's Speech in the House of Commons on 16 February 1830, ibid., p. 138.



