---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "217. Engels to Marx. 20 April "
Page_Range: "467-469"
---

# 217. Engels to Marx. 20 April 



**[p. 434]**

Enclosed also a map of Constantinople which may be of interest to you.

Schily is off to Paris with official permission. He will represent the 'house' over there and Cornelius here.

Bangya is in Erzerum—colonel, of course—is called Moham- med Bey, has had himself circumcised, and embraced the Koran. Possibly sent to General Guyon as a spy.

Damned lovely weather. A pity one can't make better use of it. According to a letter received yesterday from Trier, Edgar3 is leaving Texas on a six months' trip to London and Germany.

Your

K. M.

I can see that this letter will be too bulky, so shall send the cuttings in my next.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

217

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 20 April 1854

Dear Marx,

It's all off with The Daily News501 and, in fact, I have grounds for assuming that, by his indiscretion. Monsieur Pieper has played me a dirty trick which I shall not forget in a hurry. Everything was ALL RIGHT, only the fee to be settled, my articleb already set up in print—I have the proof copy in my pocket. As long ago as a week last Wednesday I wrote to the fellows saying I would accept their

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Edgar von Westphalen - b F. Engels, 'The Russian Army'.



I can think of only one explanation for this strange behaviour: Pieper who, to judge by a foolish letter he wrote me a week ago,517

knew about the thing, must have been talking big about it and thus, by the well-known telegraphic medium of emigre gossip, the story came to the ears of Kinkel or some other wretched German blighter acquainted with The Daily News and then, of course, nothing was easier than to represent Engels, the MILITARY MAN, as no more than a former one-year volunteer, a communist and a clerk by trade, thus putting a stop to everything. The politeness of the

refus" was not for my benefit, of course, but Watts's. The way the letter is written does not preclude my applying again, but only to be relegated to the PENNY-A-LINERS.

I should be greatly obliged if you could find out who let the cat out of the bag; needless to say, Mr Schimmelpfennig's eulogiesb

are a poor SETOFF for this échec.c

On top of that, the shilly-shallying of the Daily News chaps has meant that in the meantime some of my sources here have become known through the German press—the Moltke,d which I have found enormously helpful, is now scarcely any good to me at all and in a fortnight all the rest will have gone the same way, and I wouldn't dream of risking another £5 on the thing ON SPECULATION.

I feel very much inclined to finish the articles on Russian military power and send them to The Times. If they published them, what an ass The Daily News would look! But a second échec would have its drawbacks, for then I should look a complete ass. That's why it's so damnable my not being in London, when everything would be perfectly simple. What do you think? Write at once and let me know.e

About the other things in a day or two. I can't let you have the article on the Russian bulletin' before the next sailing; it needs to be closely studied and compared with the map, otherwise one risks making an ass of oneself here as well.

If only you could screw more money out of the Tribune, I'd turn my back on the whole, rotten English press, where blackguardly German interlopers persuade stupid editors to reject the best

[^1]: a refusal - b See this volume, p. 433. - c failure - d H. von Moltke, Der russisch- türkische Fe Uzug in der europäischen Türkei 1828 und 1829. - e See this volume, pp. 438-39. - f ibid., p. 433.



