---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "221. Marx to Engels. 29 April "
Page_Range: "475-476"
---

# 221. Marx to Engels. 29 April 



**[p. 221]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 April 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

A few days before Heise left I had a scene with him in the presence of others over 'The Knight of the Noble Consciousness'. He came out against us as the Knight'sa steadfast (secret) supporter or AT LEAST as a venomous INDEPENDENT. The affair brewed up into a scandal. I thought it unnecessary to write to you about it 1. because you knew Heise well enough, 2. because he wrote to me, humbly asking to be recommended to you and I didn't want to give him a letter of Uriah.b

The man may, of course, have come over to us altogether, though I cannot regard his attaching himself to us when in need as proof of this. At all events, I feel that you, for your part, shouldn't get too deeply involved with Heise. Temper your trust in him and above all do not write anything jointly with the lad. Before he can be co-opted and thus 'set up' in the eyes of the public, MORE PROOFS OF HIS SINCERITY ARE WANTED. We have had too many beastly experiences not to have become cautious and tant soit peuc

mistrustful.

Imandt informs me that Blanc told him you had written to Blanc saying you would be coming up here on a visit. Is there anything in it?

Your

K. M.

[^1]: Letter enclosed with cuttings from Cluss.523

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a Willich - b 2 Samuel 11:14, 15. - c just a little



