---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "223. Marx to Engels. 3 May "
Page_Range: "478-481"
---

# 223. Marx to Engels. 3 May 

Heise, by the way, won't ever be dangerous, his writing ability is far inferior to little Dronke's, idleness is his speciality. No knowledge whatever, only a strong inclination to acquire the ABC of everything. With great difficulty he succeeded in learning the ABC of Russian, but has already forgotten it again.

Sûr ce que Dieu l'ait en sa sainte garde, habeat sibi T

Your

F. E.

First published much abridged in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First t , m e

Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

223

[London,] 3 May 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

My use of the term 'letter of Uriah'b has caused a misunder- standing. I gave Heise no letter—he didn't even take his leave of me and was, incidentally, in far too tipsy a condition to do so. He wrote to me from the hole where he was lodging near Manchester, asking for my help up there. It was in this sense that I would have regarded sending you a report on him as a 'letter of Uriah', if in a somewhat 'bolder' meaning of the term. Maybe Manchester has deprived him of the main INCITEMENT of making himself out to be a 'GREAT MAN', an 'INDEPENDENT' and a 'MALCONTENT' in the eyes of

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS234

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Certain that God has him in his safe keeping—let him have him. - ,J See this volume, p. 442.

[^4]: 16—2736





**[p. 446]**

Your military things—'retreat of the Russians from Kalafat' and the situation in the Dobrudjaa have, I think, been proved splendidly right. The bombardment of Odessa527 was, it seems, provoked by the Russians. Unless the English land troops there, little would appear to have been achieved—save to placate the bourgeois here who, inasmuch as the war is manifesting itself in the form of taxes and loans, are becoming wild about the inactivity of the ALLIED FLEETS,—PERHAPS, too, Nicholas needed a demonstration of the kind to give spice to his appeal 'to his people'.b There can no longer be any doubt about collusion between the Ministry here and Petersburg, now that the suppression of a document in the 'SECRET CORRESPONDENCE'—in which Aberdeen (1844) accepted the Russian proposals—has become common knowledge. I already had an inkling that something of the sort was going on behind the scenes because of the falsification of the dates and endorsements in the 'memorandum'c alluded to in the HOUSE OF LORDS by the Tories' EX-FOREIGN MINISTER.*1 Although the Journal de Saint- Pétersbourg itself censures these fellows for their fausse position,* it is clear from the 'DECLARATIONS IN COUNCIL'f concerning neutral, and especially Russian, shipping, that they are still agree- ing their moves with Russia. Similar DECLARATIONS- appeared at the same time in St Petersburg,528 ALMOST COUCHED IN THE SAME TERMS. Such a thing can't be a coincidence. The element they overlooked in their calculations is Bonaparte. No matter what sort of a chap

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'The European War', 'Retreat of the Russians from Kalafat', 'Position of the Armies in Turkey'. - b Marx took the report about the appeal of 23 (11) April 1854 from the telegraphic dispatch 'Turkey and Russia' in The Times, No. 21731, 3 May 1854. - c K. Marx. 'The Secret Diplomatic Correspondence' (see present edition, Vol. 13, p. 99). - d Malmesbury, [Speech in the House of Lords on 31 March 1854,] The Times, No. 21704, 1 April 1854. On this see K. Marx. 'The War Debate in Parliament', present edition, Vol. 13, pp. 134-35. - e false position. Marx probably refers to the leading article in the Journal de Saint-Pétersbourg, 7 (19) March 1854, reprinted in The Times, No. 21702, 30 March 1854: 'France'. - f Victoria R. 'A Proclamation, 29 March 1854', The Times, No. 21702, 30 March 1854.





**[p. 447]**

As you know, the Tribune prides itself on being Christian. I was all the more tickled when the fellows used for a LEADER an article of mine in which one of the chief things I held against the Turks was the fact of their having preserved Christianity/ although I did not of course say so quite so bluntly. INDEED, one reason why the Turks are bound to come to grief is that they have allowed Byzantine theocracy to develop in a way that not even the Greek emperors would have dreamed of. There are, in effect, only 2 religious peoples left, the Turks and the Greco-Slav population of Turkey. Both are doomed, or at least the latter, along with the clerically ordered society which has been consolidated under Turkish rule.

I have, besides, sent the Tribune a scandalous story about the 'Holy Sepulchre' and the 'Protectorate' in Turkey,b in whk!h the historical matter will blind the fellows to the prank I play on Christianity.

I should be very glad if you could supply me with something for the Tribune,c since I am very busy studying the history of the New Greek Empire including King Otto,530 but it will be a couple of weeks, perhaps, before I can present the result in a series of articles. Metaxas, who was Greek ambassador in Constantinople where he engaged in plotting—the Paris Presse published a pretty account of this Russo-Greek Bangyanade—was the principal tool of the INFAMOUS Capodistria.531

At odd moments I am going in for Spanish. Have begun with Calderôn from whose Magico prodigioso—the Catholic Faustus— Goethe drew not just a passage here or there but whole settings for some of scenes in his Faust. Then—horribile dictu A—I am reading in Spanish what I'd found impossible in French, Chateaubriand's Atala and René, and some stuff by Bernardin de St-Pierre. Am now in the middle of Don Quixote. I find that a dictionary is more necessary in Spanish than in Italian at the start.

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'The Greek Insurrection'. - b K. Marx, 'Declaration of War.—On the History of the Eastern Question'. - c See this volume, p. 448. - d horrible to relate

[^2]: 16*



