---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "224. Marx to Engels. 6 May "
Page_Range: "481-483"
---

# 224. Marx to Engels. 6 May 



**[p. 448]**

You still owe me a letter about Mr Urquhart's military stuff.3

The man can be caught out only in the 'positive' SCIENCES. I.e. here and in his economics, the superficiality of which can likewise be tangibly demonstrated.

Vale faveque^

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

224

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 6 May 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: Unfortunately your 'DISPATCH'C did not arrive yesterday until the post office had closed, and the LETTER could not be sent to New York even against payment of the customary shilling.

[^3]: The Pole Miskowsky—vide the 'Knight of the Noble'—has come to a very bad end. The poor devil had long been in the most wretched circumstances, had never succeeded in raising the wherewithal for the trip to Constantinople—AS HE WAS NOT ONE OF THE 'MINIONS' OF THE 'GOVERNOR"1—and had thus sunk to being a lumpen- proletarian in Whitechapel to whom we in the WEST END FROM TIME TO TIME sent some small aid. A few days ago the pauvre diable,e

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 422 - b Good-bye and farewell. - c F. Engels, 'News from the European Contest'. - d Lajos Kossuth - e poor devil





**[p. 449]**

Since Wiss, Doctor of Universal Wisdom, had launched in the Republik der Arbeiter A FURIOUS ONSLAUGHT on our 'corrupt ideas' and mindless 'frivolity',b I thought it fitting to obtain from Edgar Bauer, whom I see from time to time—a rendez-vous invariably followed by a hangover—some information on this lumen mundi,c

now a shareholder in Weitling's stables of bliss. Briefly, this is what I learned there:

Mr Wiss apparently arrived in Berlin shortly after your time.533

He was a vain youth with a marked aversion for 'POSITIVE' knowledge, which is why he never succeeded in passing his medical examinations and threw himself passionately into the universal wisdom which was concentrated in Stehely's.534 Initially a Brunoistd and then a Stirnerian, he became a member of Edgar Bauer's society of 'The Free',535 was much interested in the emancipation of women, and resolved to become 'frivolous'. In pursuance of this aim he tumbled the landlady with whom he lodged—a midwife. The midwife then set to work on the 'frivolous' one's conscience, bemoaning the loss of her 'LESSER WALLACHIA' which damage Wiss, le bonhomme,e helped make good by cohabiting with her in 'free' marriage. Much though she esteemed Mr Wiss' money-bag, the midwife thought no less highly of the 'natural' bag of a certain working man, a lusty mechanic who lodged in the same house. Here again the great Wiss helped make good the damage by permitting the working man to work the machinery while reserving for himself the pleasure of ennobling the resulting product with the name of 'Proudhon-Fourier Wiss' and, whenever the name Proudhon was mentioned in the society of The Free, it was not the one in Paris they meant but the mechanic's OFFSPRING christened by Wiss.

Since Mr Wiss spent a great deal of money, learned nothing, and extolled free marriage, his worthy papa ceased to honour his bills, after which he lived on minor literature à la Meyen and loans made to him on his 'espérances'f by philanthropists in Berlin. Came the revolution. Wiss became a popular orator, and one of the vice-chairmen of the democratic club, helped in by

[^1]: a Voltaire, Candide. - b E. Wiß, 'Die elementaren Richtungen der Zeit', Republik der Arbeiter, No. 15, 8 April 1854. The article was published in instalments from March to June 1854. - c light of the world - d supporter of Bruno Bauer - e the worthy fellow - f expectations



