---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "225. Engels to Marx. 9 May "
Page_Range: "483-486"
---

# 225. Engels to Marx. 9 May 

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

225

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 May 1854 Dear Marx,

I cannot understand the late arrival of the Tribune article.15 The letter was specially entrusted to the messenger-boy, who took it to the post at a quarter past 7, at the same time as the business letters, all of which arrived punctually. Even if it had not left until the 2nd post, it should have been in your hands by 2 o'clock at the latest. I can only regard it as evidence of Mr Palmerston's solicitude for you. Since the bit about the battle has not materialised in the meantime, I can- only hope you haven't sent off the article.

With regard to Urquhart's military stuff,c something in my next. I can, of course, deal with this subject only in notes, which I shall write straight off in English for you. You will then have to work them into your article.

The story of Dr Wiss is most edifying and Cluss will certainly ensure that it reaches the right people.

[^1]: As for that poor devil Miskowsky, the Noble Oned can now say

[^2]: a in the end - b See this volume, p. 448. - c ibid., pp. 422 and 448. - d August Willich





**[p. 451]**

If at all possible, I shall set Heise to work—which, indeed, he cannot possibly avoid the moment I begin to hold off. The fellow's presently in Bradford, whither he was summoned by the little man 2 during the absence of the latter's principalb and whence, in any case, he returns in an exceedingly tipsy condition, so that he has to spend a few days in quarantine before he's good for anything. I was much tickled by the little man's little article0

because of the care with which he retrieves and repeats all the

Neue Rheinische Zeitungs old chestnuts about Schleswig-Holstein, Belgium,*1 etc., etc.

Feldzug der Schleswig-Holsteinischen Armee und Marine 1850, by A. Liitgen, sometime Major, is the first sensible and comprehen- sive book about the Willisen episode. It confirms everything I had already deduced from preliminary studies of the affaire Monsieur Willisen's original plan was a very good one,—if somewhat over-extended—so good that even the botched and belated attempt to revert to it instilled thoughts of withdrawal in the minds of the Danes, who were 36,000 strong against 26,000, almost all of their troops being already committed, whereas the Schleswig-Holsteiners had certainly '/s of their troops still uncom- mitted. But when Monsieur Willisen actually found himself face to face with the enemy, he lost his head amidst the contradictory reports and the even more confused suggestions that were being made to him. Even the night before the battle, he detached his own reserves to a point on the left, right off the battle-field, to face an imaginary enemy and at the same time deferred the order for the attack, upon which all the dispositions had been based. Thus, concentration of reserves on the left where no enemy existed, exposure of the centre, which received the main attack, confusion on the right wing, which was to launch the main counter-attack. This alone is enough to explain the outcome, and even then he might have emerged victorious had he not too

[^1]: a Ernst Dronke - b John Buckup - e E. Dronke, 'Naturgeschichte der Demokratie',

[^2]: Die Reform, 12 April 1854. - d Articles by Marx and Engels: 'The War Comedy,' 'The Faedreland on the Armistice with Denmark', 'The Armistice with Denmark', 'The Armistice "Negotiations" ', 'Armistice Negotiations with Denmark Broken Off, 'The Danish-Prussian Armistice', 'Ratification of the Armistice', 'The "Model State" of Belgium', 'The "Model Constitutional State" ', 'The Antwerp Death Sentences', etc. (see present edition, Vol. 7). - e See this volume, pp. 103-04.





**[p. 452]**

The bombardment of Odessa527 was a must for the allies because of the insult to the flag of truce. Not much damage appears to have been done and, since they didn't land or occupy the city, it was more of a defeat than a victory. Nicest of all is the humbug that they 'sailed in the direction of Sevastopol'.0 Incidentally, with every Russian action and the RETALIATION, at least apparent or attempted, this necessitates, the war is increasingly slipping from the grasp of Aberdeen and Palmerston and will gradually assume a more warlike course. As it is, Bonaparte must soon acquire gloire of a rather more tangible sort, even though his faithful Fridolin, Saint-Arnaud,d is just the man to push him further into the soup. Had this noble fellow not had a fortune to refaire,1" the fortune he has already squandered away several times since 1851, he would never have gone East. But he and his ilk are just the men to ruin the best of troops by fraudulent supply contracts and then,

[^1]: a Gerhard Krogh - b Frederick VII - c See 'The Black Sea. The Bombardment of Odessa', The Morning Advertiser, No. 19615, 4 May 1854; 'Latest Intelligence', The Times, No. 21734, 6 May 1854. - d Saint-Arnaud is compared to a character in Schiller's ballad 'Der Gang nach dem Eisenhammer'. - e remake



