---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "227. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 1 June "
Page_Range: "487-490"
---

# 227. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 1 June 

The enclosed letter to be communicated to no one but Lupus. It would seem to be Heise's mission to compromise you in Manchester. Beware of the fellow.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, „ , , . , , . x, • r .. ,• Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published m English in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, h r s t t l m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

227

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE539

London, 1 June 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Lassalle,

I have been seriously ill these past 2 or 3 weeks and, on top of that, the 3 children" went down with the measles, from which they have only just recovered, so that the whole house has been turned into a hospital. I did not start going out again until 2 days ago and, since my head was the worst affected and all conversation exhausted me, I have seen no visitors during this time. The result is that I have heard little or nothing of the émigrés' activities and intentions. As you will be aware, Mazzini is in Switzerland incognito. From letters from Washington I gather that the émigrés are, as always, dreaming ambitious dreams. The confidential reports sent to America by the gentlemen here percolate back to me through a channel in Washington.b

[^1]: IN DÜSSELDORF

[^2]: In my next I may be à mêmec to send you the detailed information you ask for on the doings of the émigrés.540

[^3]: a Jenny, Laura and Edgar - b Cluss - c in a position





**[p. 455]**

Even The Times has been poking some mild fun at the 'Cologne TRICKERS' in London who bellow from a hundred throats—bellow at the English:

'Softly sounding through my mind Many a delightful chime'3

or else,

'Lonely I am not alone'b

and more in similar vein.

As regards the 'Palmerston',—he is presently straining every nerve to gain complete control of the War Office, though he has a rival in the Duke of Newcastle, a Peelite—, only the first few of the articles I wrote for the Tribune have been printed here as pamphlets.0 I myself prevented further publication, as pamphlets by Urquhart were appearing alternately in the same series of 'Political Fly-Sheets'541 and I do not wish to be numbered among the followers of that gentleman with whom I have only one thing in common, viz. my views on Palmerston, but to whom in all other matters I am diametrically opposed, as became apparent at our very first meeting/ He is a romantic reactionary—a Turk, and would gladly guide the West back to Turkish standards and structures. I have not sent you these few short pamphlets as the cost of posting small parcels is disproportionately high. As for the substance of the matter, you are perfectly right to abide by your opinion until wholly unequivocal facts cause you to change it. What has gone to make up my own view is not this or that isolated fact—each isolated fact admitting of a variety of interpretations— but the concatenation of all the steps taken by this man, the whole context of his activities since 1829. In it I have discovered a consistent plan that assumes various and often seemingly con- tradictory forms but is always directed towards the same goal, a plan uniformly executed with the same supreme disdain. As regards the specific points you raise, my comments are: 1. Pacifico Expedition.345 In a work by one of Palmerston's former secretaries at the embassy in Athens—1836—namely the Diplomatic History of Greece by Mr Parish, you will find to begin

[^1]: a Heine, 'Neuer Frühling', 6. Gedicht. - b P. A. Wolff, Preciosa, Act II, Scene 2. The drama provided the libretto for Weber's opera of the same title. - c K. Marx. 'Palmerston', II, III. - d See this volume, pp. 412-13.





**[p. 456]**

2. Recognition of the coup d'état.3 Necessary to get Bonaparte into his toils.74 Similarly, in connection with the Spanish troubles, he brought the Quadruple Alliance into being earlier in order to get Louis Philippe into the mire.543

3. The instruction of 19 June 1839—wholly justifies my view. It was not London but Paris which suggested that in no circumstances should Russia be allowed to carry out the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi510 (which, by the by, was of Mr Palmerston's making). The proof—a dispatch from Soult to the Baron de Bourqueney, 30 May 1839. Similarly 17 June 1839, etc. Palmer- ston, who made as if to believe that the Sultan wished to see the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi put into effect and the Russians in Constantinople, sent a dispatch to Earl Granville in Paris on 19 June, enclosing his 'PROPOSED INSTRUCTIONS' of even date 'TO THE ADMIRAL, SIR ROBERT STOPEORD', in which, among many other ambiguous and inane proposals, he also instructed the Admiral if necessary 'TO FORCE THE PASSAGE OF DARDANELLES'. Soult, with great bon sensh (see dispatch from Earl Granville to Viscount Palmerston, Paris, 28 June 1839), drew Palmerston's attention to the fact that it was not the Sultan but Russia who was their enemy, that this forcing of the Dardanelles was inane and that it would suffice if the English and French ambassadors in Constantinople were to ask the Sultan — who desired nothing better—to permit the entry of the United Fleets into the Dardanelles. To this Palmerston could raise no objection, but put forward a proposal even more inane, whereupon Soult wrote:

[^1]: 'The NOBLE LORD would seem to resign himself WITH GREAT FACILITY TO

[^2]: THE CONTINGENCY OF A RUSSIAN OCCUPATION OF CONSTANTINOPLE'. And so it goes on, Palmerston always thwarting French action

[^3]: a Bonaparte's coup d'état of 2 December 1851 in France. - b good sense



