---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "228. Marx to Engels. 3 June "
Page_Range: "490-492"
---

# 228. Marx to Engels. 3 June 



**[p. 457]**

I should be greatly obliged to you if you would write to me often and at length about conditions in Germany, particularly Prussia.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle. Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften. Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

228

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 3 June 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

I am back on my feet and the children out of bed again, if not yet out of the house, but now my wife has become very unwell, probably as a result of the night vigils and nursing, and the worst of it is that instead of consulting the doctor which she refuses to do, she is dosing herself—on the pretext that two years ago when she was similarly indisposed, Freund's medicines only made her worse. If matters don't improve I shall finally have to resort to force. Thus I shan't be able to do the correspondence on Tuesday, for on that day Pieper's lessons prevent him from acting as secretary and, with my wife in her present state, I can't bother her with any writing. As you can see, I've become a regular Peter Schlemihl.a But over the years we have all enjoyed very good health on the whole and will, I hope, do so again when this crisis

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Chamisso, Peter Schlemihl's wundersame Geschichte.





**[p. 458]**

I wrote an articleb yesterday deriding the plan of campaign published in Thursday's Times.0 However, if the French papers are to be trusted, it would not appear to be an official one. The

Moniteur reports that Omer Pasha is hurrying to relieve Silistria.d

Perhaps this is simply a device to keep the Parisians in good humour and to counteract the great Boichot's presence in Paris.e I can make little of the Russian reports or of Napier's in today's paper/ Au boufi the English would again appear to have achieved nothing.

Yesterday a great raw-boned chap, a democratic loafer, intro- duced himself to me as Dr Otto. Danish by birth. Ostensibly now expelled from Schleswig-Holstein. Took part in the 1848/49 Schleswig-Holstein and 'Thuringian' movement. Does Lupus, by any chance, possess any particular information about the man?

Have finished reading the Archivio delle cose dltalia. The man's Considerazionih at the back of the book endeavour to demonstrate the opposite of what emerges from his collection of documents, namely that the Giovane Italia,545 and CONSEQUENTLY Giuseppe Mazzini, were the soul of the 1848 movement. What is particularly amusing is the final section in which he proves that the movements [must] shed their narrow, national character: FRATERNISA- TION among the various nations that came to grief in 1848/49 as a result of their isolation; Russia or the UNITED STATES OF EUROPE. At this point comes the following revelation:

And this ' I'onnipotente alleanza degli oppress? was effectuated by Mazzini as follows:

[^1]: 'La servitù d'Italia è patto europeo: l'Italia non puö esser libera che in seno a una libera Europa. Allora apparve manifesto doversi sancire, contro l'alleanza dei pochi oppressori, l'omnipotente alleanza degli oppressi.'' [Archivio, Vol. I, 560]

[^2]: a At bottom - b K. Marx, 'The Formation of a Special Ministry of War in Britain.—The War on the Danube.—The Economic Situation'. - c The Times, No. 21756, 1 June 1854, leader. - d [Report from Belgrade of 29 May 1854,] Le Moniteur universel, No. 151, 31 May 1854. - e Marx derides the pseudo- revolutionary activity of the French petty-bourgeois democrats. See this volume, pp. 461-62. - f Reports in Journal de Saint-Pétersbourg of 26 May 1854 and Napier's military reports in the section 'The Baltic Fleet' of The Times, No. 21758, 3 June 1854. - 8 In the end - h Comments - ' 'Italy's servitude is a European compact: Italy can be free only in the bosom of a free Europe. Then it became manifest that an omnipotent alliance of the oppressed must be formed to oppose the alliance of the few oppressors.'



