---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "229. Engels to Marx. 10 June "
Page_Range: "492-494"
---

# 229. Engels to Marx. 10 June 



**[p. 459]**

Have received newspapers from America, but still no letter. 'Ruge', who has concluded the 'nuovo patto' with Mazzini, declares in Dulon's little sheetb that, as a result of the war against Russia, there is now a prospect of 'liberal' development in Germany and that, even though no more may be achieved than 'freedom as in England', one ought to participate in it. To adopt a pessimistic view is 'base, idle and Russian'. As you can see, the prospect of his private fortune being exhausted within the year has made the noble man ready to attach himself to any form of 'progress' and, au cas de besoin,12 become 'constitutional'.

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published m English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, time Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

229

ENGELS TO MARX

Manchester, 10 June 1854

Dear Marx,

I was very sorry I was unable to send you an article for Tuesday's post,d but it was a sheer impossibility because of the many jobs to be done at the office which now absolutely preclude my

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a 'Then Mazzini accomplished his arduous mission, concluded a new pact with Ledru-Rollin and Darasz and Ruge, binding Italy not only to Poland and France but to that same Germany, up till now the willing handmaiden, if not the priestess, of servitude. And thus pilgrims belonging to opposing sides and the most hostile peoples will unite before the common shrine of liberty.' - b Probably the journal Für die freien Gemeinden. - c in case of need - 6 June





**[p. 460]**

I am now swotting the Hungarian campaign in real earnest and shall, I think, have worked my way through all the sources by October; come what may, I shall write the book this winter} The more I go into it, the prettier the thing gets on both sides. At present I am comparing Görgey and Windischgrätz,547 and find that in his self-apology the latter is as mendacious as in his bulletins548 he hasn't the courage to disown. Delightful, how each of the two adversaries tries to make his own army out to be worse than the opposing one. Père Windischgrätz, incidentally, proves himself the ass we know him to be—HE HAS ACTUALLY WRITTEN HIMSELF DOWN AN ASS—and was most ably abetted in his tomfoolery by men even more stupid, if such a thing is possible, than himself, namely his subordinate generals Wrbna, Csorich and, above all, the chivalrous Banus Jellacic. Görgey's cynicism enables him to record the facts much more frankly and correctly than that mendacious apologist Windischgrätz. However, it is a campaign altogether worthy of the year '48/49.

Cold feet on both sides, the old armies and the revolutionary forces both discredited. Next week I hope to receive the official Austrian bookc and one of these days I shall go through the Brockhaus catalogues to find what sources are still required. Another thing I need is Klapkad; then I shall have all the principal stuff.

The thing for The Timese will be written next week; I now have all the sources and need only do a little more work on them. Could you find out in London what military periodicals are published there? Just in case of need.

Now I must go to the bookseller's if I am not to find it shut; let's hear from you soon.

[^1]: a F. Engels, 'The Siege of Silistria'. - b See this volume, pp. 309-10. - c Probably Sammlung der für Ungarn erlassenen Allerhöchsten Manifeste und Proklamationen, dann der Kundmachungen der Oberbefehlshaber der kaiserlichen Armee in Ungarn. - d G. Klapka, Memoiren. April bis Oktober 1849. - c See this volume, pp. 435 and 437-38.



