---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "231. Engels to Marx. 15 June "
Page_Range: "496-497"
---

# 231. Engels to Marx. 15 June 



**[p. 463]**

time

Dronke's bad luckb is tragi-comical. The fellows seem to be playing havoc in Bradford.

Your

K. M.

First published (except the last para- Printed according to the original graph) in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, ^ b h s h e d m English for the first 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

231

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 15 June 1854 Dear Marx,

Cluss' letter most amusing. I had wanted to write to you at greater length today, but now find it's too late, so will confine myself to telling you that I have not been able to finish by today, as I had intended, the article on relative strengths and Silistria's chances of relief. That would involve looking up a lot of old stuff and since anyhow, in view of your wife's illness, your greatest difficulty will be to have an article ready for Tuesday's steamer, I shall see what sort of a piece I can concoct for you by then.

Heise, too, is ill now; I don't yet know what ails him, but he's said to be in bed and to have all sorts of pains in his chest. Pfänder got something in his eye which will prevent him from working for a couple of days. Bad luck everywhere, je n'y vois plus

Your

F. E.

[^1]: clair.c Regards to your wife and children.

[^2]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- . . . , , , . , 1013 Published in English for the irrst time

[^3]: a Caroline von Westphalen - b See this volume, p. 461. - c I'm quite bemused



