---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "237. Marx to Engels. 22 July "
Page_Range: "502-505"
---

# 237. Marx to Engels. 22 July 

In other ways it suits me very well that the swank and swagger of the Heise-Dronke-Imandt trio should come to an inglorious end, for otherwise one would get no respite from these people with their rumbustious drunken contentiousness. Heise, at any rate, has his SETTLER in the shape of a crooked finger which he will probably retain for the rest of his days, and Dronke, too, has doubtless had enough.

S o NO MORE FROM YOUR AFFECTIONATE

F. E.

First published in part in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

237

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 July 1854 Dear Engels,

The alternative reason you suggest for my long silencea is the correct one. It would certainly have been preferable had swotting been the obstacle. I added another £3 to the 5 so as to pay the 'friend'b the first instalment and I also needed about £8 for my wife's trip, which could no longer be postponed and which called for all manner of new equipment, since she could naturally not arrive in Trier looking shabby. These extraordinary expenses again brought me into conflict with my permanent and 'decent' creditors AND SO FORTH. 'It's the old, old story.'c

Not a sign of life from Cluss for four weeks now.

I must now quite definitely do something further on the military situation in Turkey. Firstly: The mess in Asia. Secondly: What I have been able to glean from the French Press concerning the latest developments on the Danube, though for lack of a map I

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: Que dites-vous de ÏEspagne?d 557

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 468 - b Dr Freund. (Freund in German—friend.) - c Heine, 'Lyrisches Intermezzo', 39. - d What do you think of Spain?





**[p. 470]**

another eastwards for the Argish. There they took up positions and on the 9th and 10th Selim Pasha and Iskander Bey are said to have carried out a successful attack on the Russians in Frateshti. On the 9th Gorchakov moved to Dzurdzuma (?) with 20,000 men and has been bringing in fresh troops daily. His positions: On the left bank of the Argish, the crossings over which have been fortified at Fulojci (?),Falastock (?),Korotzani (?) and Prczietsheni (?). Positions of the Russian army as a whole: Left wing from Kimpolung and Kimpina (?) along the Argish to Braila and Galatz. Turks: From Kalafat through Turna, Giurgevo to Oltenitza and (?) Kalarash. From Turna to Islaz. Here Selim Pasha in contact with Iskander Bey. Main corps at Giurgevo, corps above Giurgevo constitutes an advanced post on the left of the Argish, Oltenitza and Silistria. Thirdly: The total strength of the Russian army, from an article in The Morning Chronicleh; but contrary to the article I estimate a battalion at no more than 550 men.

[^1]: Infantry.

[^2]: 3 divisions of 3rd corps (Osten-Sacken) 3 " " 4th " (Dannenberg I) 2 " " 5th " Lüders

[^3]: 8 divisions=16 brigades=128 battalions Total approx. 71,000 men

[^4]: Cavalry. 3 divisions of light cavalry

[^5]: 1 " " " dragoons

[^6]: 128 squadrons each of 120 men, over 15,000 Artillery. 46 batteries (each of 10 guns = 460) ([each of] 8 guns = 368) Servicing crews and drivers =12,000 (?)

[^7]: a Should be Calugereni. - b 'Prussia. From our own correspondent', The Morning Chronicle, No. 27321, 21 July 1854.



ALL:

128 battalions of infantry = 71,000

3 battalions of sappers 2,000

128 squadrons 15,000

40 pieces of artillery 13,000

train 3,000

Cossacks 8,000

Wall[achian] militia 6,000

Total 118,000

Fourthly: Items which cannot be treated humorously without a map: the hitherto snail-like progress of the French and English, who, it would seem, will not cross the Danube. For what purpose has St-Arnaud ordered his troops to march from Adrianople to Burgas in the present heat? The noble fellow would seem to be perpetually shuttling to and fro between Constantinople and this place or that, simply for the sake of the travelling expenses. What is the truth realiter" about the English commissariat in Varna, Devna, etc.?

at least send me a few notes which I can use.

Apropos. About the poem.c It probably derives from Gottfried, hight Kinkel, or else from a Silesian poet of the school of Opitz, or was it composed by Fteise himself?

I enclose a manuscript snatched from a young writer; show it to no one but Lupus. Who is this young writer?

Salut.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: If you no longer have time to write me an article for Tuesday,b

[^2]: First published considerably abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a in actual fact - b 25 July - c See this volume, p. 466.

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time



