---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "238. Marx to Engels. 27 July "
Page_Range: "505-510"
---

# 238. Marx to Engels. 27 July 



**[p. 238]**

MARX TO ENGELS84

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27 July 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Je vous attends" for Tuesday.558 How very boastful Mr Herbert was. This same Herbert was Vorontsov's brother-in-law and at the same time English SECRETARY AT WAR. The way the English brag as though Nasmyth and Butler had held Silistria 'single-handed' is grotesque. Have you read about Monday evening's session, when Disraeli so neatly punctured LITTLE JOHN'Sb and the Times' 'Sevas- topol' BUBBLE with one prick of the needle?559

I am, hélas,c once again saddled with Pieper who looks like a HALF-STARVED sucking pig seethed in milk, after having lived for a fortnight with a whore he describes as un bijou.d He has frittered away some £20 in a fortnight and now both his purses are equally depleted. In this heat it is a bore to have the fellow hanging around one du matin jusqu'au soir et du soir jusqu'au matin" And it disrupts one's work.

On Saturday' I got the following note from Papa Tucker:

Incidentally I have also heard from Freiligrath that that rogue Trübner is advertising these 'Fly-Sheets' under his imprint. You will note that he asks for 'ARTICLES FROM THE TRIBUNH:' in order once AGAIN to evade the question of money. Now, 1. So far as he is concerned, not one copy of the Tribune is to be had anywhere in London, since it is sent only to subscribers and back numbers cannot even be ordered from New York; 2. Without substantial additions, none of the articles would now suit. Now I must clear up the matter with the fellow and this 'easy-going' relationship

[^1]: * 'Dear Sir, There is a pretty brisk demand for the "Fly-Sheets"541 just now. Could you send me some articles from the Tribune that could suit the taste of the public? The third on Palmerston would move the other two.« Faithfully Yours E. Tucker.' *

[^2]: a I expect [something from] you - b Lord John Russell - c alas - d a jewel - e from morning to night and night to morning - f 22 July - s A reference to the third, fourth and fifth articles from Marx's Lord Palmerston which were published as two separate pamphlets.



1. Of the Tribune articles, I shall give him (for publication) the critique of the 'SECRET CORRESPONDENCE'.3 For this Dronke would only have to send me the 2nd article on this, which was detained by the Post Office here. The latter gratis, 2 and 3 to be paid for in cash and on delivery of the MSS, namely.

2. A GENERAL pamphlet on Palmerston, beginning with my introduction in the Tribuneb to which I should, however, add a new middle and ending.

3. A pamphlet that I would have to write in collaboration with you, i.e. on England's DIPLOMACY and MILITARY ACTION since war was declared. The articles which have appeared in the Tribune will provide us with material for both these aspects. If you agree to 3, the question arises:

How much do we ask? After all, my articles do seem to sell better than Urquhart's who is 'happy' if his stuff in the Advertiser is accepted by Tucker for the 'Fly-Sheets'.

If you agree with all this—(Nos. 2 and 3 would, of course, have to be pungent enough TO PRODUCE A REAL SENSATION in London; moreover, such is the footing we are on with Tucker that we can write anything we choose without worrying about English pre- judices)—then compose a letter for me putting these proposals to Mr Tucker. Not being sufficiently adept in business matters, I have deliberately avoided answering him either orally or in writing. But no time is to be lost.

A book that has interested me greatly is Thierry's Histoire de la formation et du progrès du Tiers Etat, 1853.560 It is strange how this gendeman, le pèrec of the 'class struggle' in French historiography, inveighs in his Preface against the 'moderns' who, while also perceiving the antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, purport to discover traces of such opposition as far back as the history of the tiers-étatd prior to 1789. He is at great pains to show that the tiers-état comprises all social ranks and estates save the noblesse and clergé and that the bourgeoisie plays the role of representative of all these other elements. Quotes, for example, from Venetian embassy reports:

[^1]: a K. Marx, 'The Documents on the Partition of Turkey' and 'The Secret Diplomatic Correspondence'. - b K. Marx, Lord Palmerston, first and second articles (entitled 'Palmerston' in the New-York Daily Tribune).- c the father - d Third Estate





**[p. 474]**

Had Mr Thierry read our stuff, he would know that the decisive opposition between bourgeoisie and peuple does not, of course, crystallise until the former ceases, as tiers-état, to oppose the clergé and the noblesse. But as for the 'racines dans l'histoire d'un antagonisme né d'hier'* his book provides the best proof that the origin of the 'racines' coincided with the origin of the tiers-état. By the same token, this otherwise intelligent critic wou!d_ have to conclude from the 'Senatus populusque Romanus'c that in Rome there was never any opposition save that between the senatus and the populus. I was interested to discover from the documents he quotes that the term 'catalla, capitalia', capital, came into being with the rise of the communes. He has, by the by, unwittingly demonstrated that the victory of the French bourgeoisie was delayed by nothing so much as the fact that it did not decide until 1789 to make COMMON CAUSE with the peasants. Although he does not generalise, he depicts very nicely, 1. how from the beginning, or at least since the rise of the towns, the French bourgeoisie has gained undue influence by constituting itself a parliament, bureaucracy, etc., and not, as in England, by commerce and industrie alone. This undoubtedly holds true even of present-day France. 2. From his account it may be readily shown how the class rises as the various forms in which its centre of gravity has lain at different times are ruined and with them the different sections whose influence derives from these forms. In my view, this sequence of metamorphoses leading up to the domination of the class has never before been thus presented—at least so far as the material is concerned. In regard to the maîtrises, jurandes,6 etc., in short, the forms, in which the industrial bourgeoisie develops, he has, alas, restricted himself almost wholly to general, and generally known, phrases, despite the fact that here too he alone is familiar with the material. What he successfully elaborates and underlines is the conspiratorial and revolutionary nature of the municipal move- ment in the twelfth century. The German Emperors, e.g. Frederick I and Frederick II, issued edicts against these 'com-

[^1]: a 'These that call themselves the Estates of the realm are of three orders of persons, that of the clergy, of the nobility, and of the rest of those persons who, in common parlance, may be called the people.' - b 'roots in history of an antagonism born yesterday' - c the Senate and Roman people - d guilds, corpora- tions



'Pervenit nuper ad notitiam nostram quod quarumdam civitatum, villarum et aliorum locorum universitates exc proprio motu constituerunt juridictiones, potestates' (Potestad), 'consulatus, regimina et alia quaedam statuta et cum jam apud quasdam in abusum et pravam consuetudinem inoleverunt nos ex imperiali auctoritate tam juridictiones etc. atque concessiones super his, per comités Provinciae et Forcalquerii ab eis obtentas, ex certa scientia revocamus, et inania esse censemus' [II, 87].d

Further:

Conventiculas quoque omnes et conjurationes in civitatibus et extra inter civitatem et civitatem et inter personam et personam seu inter civitatem et personam, omnibus modis fieri prohibemus.' (Constitutio pacis Frederici I.)e

'Quod nulla civitas, nullum oppidum, communiones, constitutiones, col- ligationes, confederationes vel conjurationes aliquas, quocumque nomine censean- tur, facere possent; et quod nos, sine domini sui assensu, civitatibus seu oppidis in regno nostro constitutis, auctoritatem faciendi communiones, constitutiones conjurationes aliquas, quaecumque nomina imponantur eisdem, non poteramus nee debebamus impertiri.' (Henrici regis sententia contra communiones civitatum.) [II, 86]f

Is that not the raide% German professorial style to the life—the very same which later graced the fulminations of the 'Central Commission of the Confederation'562? In Germany, the 'commune jurée** penetrated no further than Trier where, in 1161, the Emperor Frederick I put a stop to it:

[^1]: a communes, secret associations, sworn confederacies - b municipal councils - c The original has 'in comitatibus ipsis degentes' instead of 'ex'. - d 'It has recently been brought to our notice that the guilds of certain cities, market towns and other places have, of their own accord, constituted tribunals, authorities (the Podesta), consulates, administrations and certain other institutions of this kind and because, among certain of them such things have already developed into abuses and malpractices we hereby, in virtue of our imperial power, and by our sure knowledge, revoke these tribunals, etc., and also the concessions in regard to them obtained through the Counts of Provence and Forcalquier and declare them null and void.' - e 'We likewise prohibit conventions and sworn confederacies of whatever kind within the cities and without between city and city or between person and person or between city and person.' (Peace Charter of Frede- rick I.) - f 'That no city and no market town may organise communes, constitutions, unions, leagues or sworn confederacies of any kind.by whatever name they may be referred to, and that, without the assent of their lord, we neither can nor should allow the cities and market towns in our Empire the right to establish communes, constitutions sworn confederacies of any kind, whatever names may be conferred on them.' (Decree of King Henry against city communes.) - 8 stiff - ^ sworn commune



The policy pursued by the German emperors was exploited by the French roisb who secretly supported 'conjurationes' and 'communiones' in Lorraine, Alsace, the Dauphiné, Franche-Comté, the Lyonnais, etc., thus alienating them from the German Empire:

'Sicut ad culminis nostri pervenit notitiam, rex Franciae sinceritatem fidei vestrae molitur corrumpere.' (Rodolphus I, epistula ad cives de Besançon.) [II, 94]c

The very same policy was used by the fellows to make Italian cities Guelphic.563

It's funny how the word 'communio' is often reviled in just the same way as communism nowadays. Thus, for example, the priest Guibert .of Nogent writes:

'Communio, novum ac pessimum nomen.'ti

There's often something rather pathetic about the way in which the twelfth-century philistines invite the peasants to take refuge in the towns, the communio jurata. As, for instance, in the Charter of St Quentin:

'Eux' (the burghers of St Quentin) 'jurèrent ensement chescun quemune ayde à son juré et quemun conseil et quemune détenanche et qüemune deffense. Ensement nous avons establi que quiconque en notre quemune entrera et ayde du sien nous donra, soit pour cause de fuite ou de paour des anemis ou de autre forfait en le quemune entrer porra, car la porte est ouverte à tous; et se son seigneur à tort ses choses aura détenu et ne le voudra détenir à droit, nous en exécuterons justice.' [II, 135]1'

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: a 'The commune of the citizens of Trier, which is also called sworn confederacy and which we have abolished in the city and which as we have heard was later set up anew, shall also be dissolved and declared null and void'. - b kings - * 'According to the information which has reached our Highness, the King of France is seeking to corrupt the sincerity of your loyalty.' (Rudolph I, Letter to the citizens of Besançon.) - d 'Commune, a new and thoroughly bad appellation'. - e 'They' (the burghers of St Quentin) 'have jointly sworn each to give common aid

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time



