---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "239. Marx to Engels. 8 August "
Page_Range: "510-511"
---

# 239. Marx to Engels. 8 August 



**[p. 239]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 August 1854

Dear Frederic,

I have duly received your war 'OBSERVATIONS'3 and incorporated

t h e m IN TODAYS LETTER. If you can possibly see your way to getting hold of some money for me I would urgently request you to do so. The £11 extra expenditure incurred over the past 6 weeks has plunged me into the utmost DESTITUTION. Moreover, Pieper, who is sans sou? has been living and eating here all that time and will certainly be staying for another 2-3 weeks. C'est dur?

Did you see in the papers that the 2 Turkish officers sent to that 'great' democrat Shamyl Bey by the Asiatic army were accom- panied by COLONEL Bangya?

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, , , • , , • „ , . , r , r Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: to his confederate and to share with him common counsel and common responsibility and common defence. We have jointly determined that whoever shall enter our commune and give us his aid, either by reason of flight or for fear of his enemies or for some other offence shall be allowed into the commune, for the gate is open to all; and if his lord had unjustly withheld his chattels and does not wish to detain him lawfully, we shall see that justice is done.' a F. Engels, 'The Attack on the Russian Forts'. - b K. Marx, 'Evacuation of the Danubian Principalities.—The Events in Spain.—A New Danish Constitution.— The Chartists'. - c penniless - d It is hard.

[^3]: 17—2736



