---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "240. Marx to Engels. 26 August "
Page_Range: "511-512"
---

# 240. Marx to Engels. 26 August 



**[p. 240]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 August 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

My wife got back on Wednesday,2 quite well. In the Fatherland, she tells me, everyone is down in the dumps on account of the 'uncertain conditions'.

I cannot imagine what has become of Cluss. The fellow hasn't written for months. Perhaps it's too hot over there.

It is a very good thing that you are rid of Heise. I don't see that a 'loafer' of this sort can be of any interest. I have not, of course, seen Imandt's correspondence with Dronke and Heise, but I do know that, if he takes part in their childish nonsense, he does so at most in a 'theoretical' sense. Down here, Imandt lives the life of a sober, hard-working citizen.

I have heard from Lassalle who announces triumphantly that the Hatzfeldt woman's 7, or rather 8, years' war is now over.356

Enfin!h 'Victory' for the old woman, who would appear to have emerged from the campaign with her virtue and, what is more, her money bags, 'vierge'." Lassalle now intends to move his domicile to Berlin, but has already heard talk about difficulties with the police.

Meyer writes to tell me that the trial of the Berlin de- magogues564 (in which Gottfried's Gottfried played a part) has been quashed by the court in Berlin (which, he doesn't say), 'because Hentze, the principal witness for the prosecution, was "questionable" '. Qu'en dis-tu?d

I have also had a letter from Miquel in Paris. He intended to come here but first he had cholera and then a haemorrhage, whereupon his doctors suggested that he had better drop the idea of sea travel and make- for home overland with all dispatch. Bad luck.

Cherval, who under the name of 'Cramer'—this time the real name was the pseudonym—had diverse experiences in Switzer- land, inter alia engraving plates for Mr Vogt, who had taken him under his wing, is now living in Paris. I have his address.

[^1]: a 23 August - b At last! - c intact - d What do you think of that?



