---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "244. Marx to Engels. 29 September "
Page_Range: "516-517"
---

# 244. Marx to Engels. 29 September 



**[p. 243]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 22 September 1854 Dear Frederic,

Just a few lines in much haste to acknowledge due receipt. Also of your letter ON THE ASIATIC WAR on Tuesday.

I have had some very important dispatches from America which I shall send you with my next letter. Je vous attends* ON TUESDAY.571

That fat swine Püttmann has been shipped off from here to Australia as a 'colonist', together with FAMILY.

Ebner has gone mad in Frankfurt. Pauvre diable.b

Ernest Jones has found a new printer on cheaper terms. Disraeli has written to tell him that he will bring up all Chartist petitions in Parliament.

The cholera epidemic, now much abated, is said to have been particularly severe in our district because *the sewers made in June, July and August, were driven through the pits where those who died of the plague 1668 (? I think) were buried*.

Your

K. M.

244

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 29 September 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: The enclosed letter from Dana will tell you about the American crisis AS FAR AS I AM AFFECTED BY IT. Upon my demanding that all or

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: I expect [something from] you - b Poor devil.



