---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "245. Marx to Engels. 10 October "
Page_Range: "517-520"
---

# 245. Marx to Engels. 10 October 



**[p. 484]**

I cannot write more than this today since I am busy just now dictating my article,574 but should have written to you at greater length had you not announced last Tuesday week that I would be getting a 'long' letter,575 which I have been waiting for in order to reply to it.

Salut

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Zivi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- . ffart 1913 Published in English for the first time

245

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 10 October3 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

D'abord mes complimentsh on your exceedingly GLORIOUS and SOUND CRITICISM.0 It's a pity that this 'fait d'armes couldn't have been accomplished in the London Press. A coup of this nature would have assured your position in that field.

Quant à notre bon" St-Arnaud who took good care to die at the right moment, I gave the Tribune a detailed biography of him576

MONTHS AGO. Of this fellow it may assuredly be said: 'Non bis in idem. 'f

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a November in the original. - b First, my congratulations - c F. Engels, 'The Battle of the Alma'. - d feat of arms - e As for our good - f Never twice on the same subject.





**[p. 485]**

2. Should not a diversion in the direction of Bessarabia have been made (by Omer Pasha) to prevent the Russians from bringing reinforcements into the Crimea from that quarter? Can negligence on this score be explained otherwise than by Anglo- Austrian diplomatic trickery?

I believe, OF COURSE, that diplomacy on the part of military commanders ceases as soon as they find themselves in a mousetrap as in the Crimea. But in all that concerns the plan as a whole, I do not believe that Palmerston has as yet ceased for one moment to evince at least his 'good will'.

In one of its recent issues, the Tribune is congratulated by my rival, A.P.C.,a for its 'SPLENDID CHARACTERISATION' of Espartero.b The man, of course, has no idea that he is 'complimenting' me, but at the same time a sure instinct has led him to take HOLD of a VERY SILLY concluding sentence that belongs exclusively to the Tribune.571

Incidentally, they had deleted every one of my jokes about constitutional heroes en general, suspecting that, lurking behind the 'Monk-Lafayette-Espartero' trio, were certain sarcasms aimed at the noble 'Washington'. The paper's uncritical attitude is horrify- ing. First, they extolled Espartero as the ONLY STATESMAN OF SPAIN. Then they took my articles,0 which treat him if anything as a comic character, and added: From this one can see that nothing is to be expected of Spain. Then, when they got the first article on Spain—mere prolegomena leading up to 1808—they believed it to constitute the whole and accordingly added on a completely heterogeneous but well-meaning conclusion urging the Spaniards to show themselves worthy of the Tribune's confidence. 78 How they will handle subsequent instalments, I do not know.

Liebknecht, as you know, has been vacillating most despondently between an Englishwoman who wanted to marry him and a German woman in Germany whom he wanted to marry. At last

[^1]: a [F. Pulszky,] An article dated 7 September 1854 and published in the section 'The State of Europe' of the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4190, 22 September 1854. - b K. Marx, 'Espartero'. - c See K. Marx, 'The Spanish Revolution.—Greece and Turkey', 'Evacuation of the Danubian Principalities.—The Events in Spain.— A New Danish Constitution.—The Chartists', 'Evacuation of Moldavia and Wallachia.— Poland.— Demands of the Spanish People'. - d Ernestine Landolt





**[p. 486]**

If you want to read something really funny you must try and get hold of Saturday's Morning Advertiser, in which the LICENSED VICTUALLERS take the present editorial board of that POTHOUSE PAPER to court.a Prosecution and defence both equally amusing. The first was conducted by Mr Foster who once figured as a BARRISTER in Baron Nicholson's court.579 All the thanks Urquhart got for having extolled the LICENSED as England's party above parties were hard words and his dismissal. Never, by the way, has the curtain been raised quite so much to reveal the innermost squalor of the SHOP-KEEPER'S soul.

I suppose you haven't -seen Bruno Bauer's L'Arrogance des pouvoirs occidentaux?11 I haven't yet managed to lay hands on it either.

Should anything important happen in the military department before Friday,' send me something to be going on with, for in that case the Spanish article, if it is to be ACCEPTABLE, will have to be preceded by a Russian one.580

I look forward to a letter from you soon.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 'The Incorporated Society of Licensed Victuallers', The Morning Advertiser, No. 19749, 7 October 1854. - b Presumably B. Bauer's De la dictature occidentale. -

[^5]: c 13 October



