---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "249. Marx to Engels. 10 November "
Page_Range: "530-531"
---

# 249. Marx to Engels. 10 November 

'Louis XVIII nous détestait.'' [I, 243]

Withal it is highly entertaining to see how this 'Dieu de St. Louis' speechifier, who had to preserve the Spanish throne for a 'petit fils de Henri JV',b595 writes most cavalièrement to General Guilleminot telling him not to 'be deterred' from bombarding Cadiz by the fear that Ferdinand VII might be struck by shot, etc.

At all events, it is hence to this ami intimec of the great Carrel, Lamennais, Béranger, etc., that the honour belongs of having, over a period of 10 years—in the company of friend Alexander—, created the biggest mess Spain has ever known, and this at the risk of blowing his Bourbons sky-high.

Another trait of this pilgrim to the Holy Sepulchre596: In the Congrès de Vérone he himself relates how he forced Louis XVIII and Villèle to send Polignac, whom both abhorred, to London as envoy. Later, under Charles X, when he himself was envoy in Rome, he suddenly and with great brio announced his resignation upon the appointment of Polignac as minister because, he alleged, 'freedom' was doomed.

If you re-read the book, your contempt for the 'crapauds'd and their 'grands hommes" is unlikely to diminish.

Adieu.

Your

249

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 10 November 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

Article splendid/ As regards Tuesday or Friday,g arrange it as you wish, although I don't yet know whether I shall have a

[^1]: K. M. First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. II, . Stutteart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a We venture to say that Alexander has become our friend.' 'Alexander is the only prince for whom we have ever felt a sincere attachment.' 'Louis XVIII detested us.' - b Henry IV's grandson - c intimate friend - d philistines - e great men - f F. Engels, 'The Campaign in the Crimea'. - s 14 or 17 November



