---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "250. Marx to Engels. 22 November "
Page_Range: "531-533"
---

# 250. Marx to Engels. 22 November 



**[p. 498]**

Père Göhringer is in the debtors' prison. His pub is closed. Bankruptcy. Hence the renewed revolutionary ardour which the noble fellow is said to have developed of late.

Pieper has to work in his institution3 from 6 in the morning until 9 at night and to pray some 20X during that time, which 'does him good'. No smoking or drinking. Takes the boys to church, etc. He was in town for an hour a few days ago. Looked very well.

Lupus has invited Dronke to Manchester for Christmas, and Dronke has invited Imandt.

No other news.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

250

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 22 November 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Received the £2 YESTERDAY. Herewith letter from Dana which will show you what use the HUMBUGS are making of the military material. The book he mentions by Ripley on the MEXICAN WAR hasn't reached me yet.5971 shall have it fetched tomorrow, leaf through it and then send it on to you.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: If you possibly can, send an article on Friday,b since I wrote about Spain on Tuesday598 and, under PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES, this

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 490. - b 24 November



No sooner had the false rumours of the fall of Sevastopol arrived than His Honour, Public Prosecutor Blind, hit on the plan of holding a German meeting—which was also to be made the occasion of a declaration of principles—against Russia and the German 'prinches' and, more particularly, ad majorem gloriam3 of the Public Prosecutor himself and the German emigration in

corpore!' It was an occasion on which the 'chiefs' of all factions were to foregather PEACEFULLY. I and Freiligrath, of course, beat off this attack, so that at first Blind's plan was frustrated. Mais comme les grands esprits se rencontrent,11 the same thing had occurred to the indefatigable Arnold Ruge—who is presendy dumping all manner of rubbish in The Morning Advertiser—and, at his written invitation, a preparatory meeting took place, COMPOSED OF: Vitting- hof {chiropodist; 60 years old, a Courlander speaking no known tongue; formerly servant to Count Vittinghof of Courland, now posing as his own master. This Vittinghof, according to Arnold's plan, was to take the chair; a gang of German merchants (Gerstenzweig, etc.) were to provide the money and call the meeting and, under their auspices, German refugees were to be let loose on the platform). Römer (Becker's stepfather and a notorious mouchardd). Meyen. Buchheim. Ronge. Ruge, Blind. Geck.e—The upshot of the meeting was that Geek and Ronge more or less 'called each other out'. Public Prosecutor Blind indignantly withdrew from the meeting because Dishcloth Ruge refused to include in the programme the phrase 'republic which unites us all'. Afterwards Blind called to see me—I was out—and complained 'bitterly' to my wife about the 'contempt' in which the 'German emigration' was held, and about our preventing any 'concerted' action. As if any of us were preventing the 7 or 8 jackasses from 'uniting' or 'demonstrating'. (However, if the fellows should cause a stir with their meeting and unduly compromise 'Germany' by licking English boots, it was our secret intention—as yet unknown, by the by, to Staatsrat Blind—to enlist the aid of the London Chartists and perhaps hold a rival meeting.)

As you can see, the 'Great Men of the Exile' are once again of the opinion that something 'has got to be done'.

[^1]: a to the greater glory - b as a body - c But as great minds think alike - d police informer - e Fop, possibly ironical for Amand Goegg.



