---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "251. Marx to Engels. 30 November "
Page_Range: "533-534"
---

# 251. Marx to Engels. 30 November 

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published m English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition. I m e

Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

251

MARX TO ENGELS234

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 30 November 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

However the substance was contained in the 5 following ones, so all that suffered was the style.

I have received from the worthy Dr Freund a third dunning letter which I enclose. How do you think I should reply to the fellow? It seems to me that ce bon amic has a mind to take extreme measures. With the positive decline in income from the Tribune, as a result of which I have sunk below the level of the great Dronke, prospects for the noble Freund look gloomier than ever. The worst of it is that I shall be needing him again soon. I have been invited through Tucker to work on a Retrospective Review which is appearing here in London. However have not yet had a detailed reply about the punctum puncti,d the fee.

The day before yesterday I finally received the 2 volumes of Ripley's Mexican War, about 1,200 pages, large format. As a military historian, Ripley seems to me—i.e. a strictly lay opinion—to

[^1]: You forgot to return Dana's letter3—very important in view of my relations with the fellows. By some oversight the first two pages were omitted from your splendid article of Tuesday's date.b

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 498. - b F. Engels, 'The Battle of Inkermann'. - c this good friend - d the crucial point



