---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "252. Marx to Engels. 2 December "
Page_Range: "534-537"
---

# 252. Marx to Engels. 2 December 



**[p. 501]**

o r PARCEL C O .

Addio

252

[London,] 2 December 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

I THINK NOT, SIR, that your letter600 or so much as your name, should be linked with the worthy 'friend'.b (The Jew is so pressing because an exceedingly refined educational establishment, which he

[^1]: Y o u r

[^2]: K. M .

[^3]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sel zxvischen F. Eneels und K. Marx. Bd. 2, • • . , , „ , • , , „ r > Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and f" . f ^ ' " g *" Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^4]: first time

[^5]: MARX TO ENGELS599

[^6]: IN MANCHESTER

[^7]: a more or less - b Dr Freund





**[p. 502]**

I had asked Lassalle whether he could not obtain some sort of literary BUSINESS for me in Germany for I must be serious IN REGARD to my decreased income and increased expenditure. Now Lassalle puts forward the following proposal,602 as to which I should like to have your well-considered opinion. At the beginning of this month his cousin, Dr M. Friedländer will become proprietor of the Neue Oder-Zeitung, but—in co. with Stein and Eisner. I am to become the paper's London correspondent.60' Friedländer doesn't think he would be able to pay more than 20 talers a month to begin with. But Lassalle believes he might be able to push him up to 30. Voilà

la proposition.3 It's a miserable pittance. However, too high a value should not be set on a litde bit of work for a German hole-and-corner rag. Even so, one might pick up £40 or £50. But Eisner and Stein—there's the rub! This calls for all the more mature consideration as these gentlemen aren't Conservatives but actually Liberals, and more directly opposed to us than the Neue

I am sending you a copy of The People's Paper so that you can read about Jones' DODGE C with Barbes (whom, between ourselves, he took for Blanqui) and his agitation against Bonaparte for the latter's proposed visit to England.604 The 'authorities' here are seriously concerned about the matter and the police, wherever feasible, have had the posters torn down. Even Reynolds and The

[^1]: Preussische Zeitung. THAT IS THE QUESTION.b Think it over carefully.

[^2]: a That's the proposal. - b Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act III, Scene 1. - c 'Welcome and Protest Committee for the Reception of Barbes in London. Fraternisation of the French Democracy in London', The People's Paper, No. 135, 2 December 1854.





**[p. 503]**

On Monday I shall send you the Ripley and Solis' Conquista de Mexico by the PARCEL COMP, you mentioned. Return the latter as soon as you no longer need it, since it doesn't belong to me. I have now read the whole of Ripley (cursorily, of course, this being sufficient for my purpose). I am no longer in any doubt—and Ripley, in his 'restrained' sarcastic style, often makes it plain—that the great Scott is nothing more than a common, petty, untalented, carping, envious cur and HUMBUG who, aware that he owed everything to the bravery of his soldiers and the SKILL of his divisional commanders, played dirty tricks in order to reap the renown himself. He appears to be as great a general as the MANY-SIDED Greeley is a great PHILOSOPHER. Throughout the campaign, the fellow made a hash of things and played the kind of tricks for which any self-respecting court martial would justifiably have had him shot. But he is America's foremost (in terms of rank) general. Which is doubtless why Dana believes in him. Without question Taylor is still worth more than Scott, as the Americ. public seems to have sensed when it made the former President of the United States and rejected the latter AGAIN AND AGAIN despite all his efforts. General Worth strikes me as the most significant of them, on which point you must let me have your opinion as soon as you have read the thing. Also, and more important, on another point. Is it not CURIOUS that Scott always remains between 2 and 10 miles from the scene of ACTIVE OPERATIONS, that he never appears on the battlefield himself, but is always simply 'OBSERVING THE PROGRESS OF EVENTS' from a safe place in the rear. He himself never appears, as Taylor certainly does, when it is necessary in the interests of the army's 'morale' for the commander-in-chief to appear. After the fierce BATTLE OF Contreras, he and all his STAFF moved up only when the whole thing was over. During the fluctuations of the BATTLE OF Molino del Rey he passed a message to the 'brave' fellows to the effect that they should stand their ground, he himself would perhaps appear in person. His 'diplomatic' talents are matched only' by his military ones. If he evinces mistrust, it is always of his

[^1]: a 'The British Democrats.— Louis Napoleon', The Leader, No. 243, 18 November 1854.



