---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "253. Marx to Engels. 8 December "
Page_Range: "537-538"
---

# 253. Marx to Engels. 8 December 

It seems to me to be typical of the war that, despite wrong or inadequate orders from their CHIEF, every division and every single small body of men at all times STUBBORNLY make for their objectives, SPONTANEOUSLY exploiting every incident, so that in the end a measure of wholeness emerges. A Yankee sense of independence and individual proficiency greater, perhaps, than that of the Anglo-Saxons.

The Spanish are already degenerate. But a degenerate Spaniard, a Mexican, is an ideal. AH the Spanish vices, braggadocio, swagger and Don Quixotry, raised to the third power, but little or nothing of the steadiness which the Spaniards possess. The Mexican guerrilla war a caricature of the Spanish,606 and even the sauve qui peut of the REGULAR ARMIES infinitely surpassed. But then the Spaniards have produced no talent comparable to that of Santa Anna.

Vale?

Your

K. M. Have you seen the fulminations against Heine by Jacobus Venedey—Kobes I b of Cologne—in the feuilleton of Saturday's Kölnische Zeitung? It's a pleasure you should not deny yourself. And Kossuth's promotion to general!!!

253

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 December 1854 Dear Frederic,

I shall be putting an article607 into the post today, although I know the post won't go. A week today I intend to do a report on Parliament. But still I urgently request you to send me an article on

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a Farewell. - b Title character of a satirical poem by Heine on Venedey published in Vermischte Schriften.

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time



