---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "254. Marx to Engels. 15 December "
Page_Range: "538-539"
---

# 254. Marx to Engels. 15 December 

You must write the pamphlet on the 'Teutonians and Slavism'.609

You should also read Bauer's England and Russia (written in French). Gustav Diezel, too, has written a 'fat' book on the subject.b Do you know Freiherr von Bode's 'Statistics on Russia'? (Appeared about six months ago.)c

Salut.

Your

K. M.

First published in part in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Mos- cow, 1929

254

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 15 December 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

Barthélemy's end is a GLORIOUS one.611 At yesterday's hearing (or rather CORONERS INQUEST) it was said that important papers, though not relating to the assassination, had been found on him.e It would be annoying if these included papers from the old days, so that we seemed to be connected with a fellow who—or so the louts boasted—was 'saving up' a bullet for us in the event of our returning to Paris.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: I have just received your note and very much look forward to seeing you here in a week's time.610

[^3]: Article received.0

[^4]: a F. Engels, 'The Military Power of Austria'. - b Presumably, G. Diezel, Russland, Deutschland und die östliche Frage. - c A. Bode ('Rhode' in the original), 'Notizen, gesammelt auf einer Forstreise durch einen Theil des Europäischen Russlands', Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Russischen Reiches und der angränzenden Länder Asiens. - d Engels' part of the article 'Progress of the War' written jointly with Marx. - e 'The Inquest', The Times, No. 21925, 15 December 1854.



