---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "255. Marx to Moritz Eisner. 20 December "
Page_Range: "539-541"
---

# 255. Marx to Moritz Eisner. 20 December 

Tomorrow I shall be saddled with Blind and wife. This 'shinishter' Russophobe and 'repelbican' still insists that Baden is the real land of the future.

Salut. And give my regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

255

MARX TO MORITZ ELSNER

London, Wednesday, 20 December 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Eisner,

Your letter arrived here on Monday. I myself only got back today after spending a few days visiting Engels and Lupus in Manchester.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN BRESLAU

[^3]: a the Library of the British Museum - b R. S. Ripley, The War with Mexico, in two volumes. - c W. F. P. Napier, History of the War in the Peninsula and in the South of France, from the Year 1807 to the Year 1814, vols. I-VI.



As you are aware, I edited a Prussian newspaper3 under censorship—for a whole year. So I am quite familiar with the torments which the Neue Oder-Zeitung may have to endure under a new form of censorship, and it is these difficulties, the UNDERHAND struggle AGAINST THE ESTABLISHED POWERS which incline me to work in the interest of this paper.

So far as I am aware, and I know pretty well all the important reading-rooms in London, the N.O.-Z. is not available in any of them. Hence, for the time being, you'll have to send it direct to me. I might perhaps be able to introduce it into a reading-room or

COFFEE-ROOM.

You would particularly oblige me if, by way of an exception, you could send me one issue of the Breslauer Zeitung. Although Edgar Bauer comes to see me every week, he has never spoken about his articles and I would like to get to know his views from one 'sample'.

Since Parliament will be going into recess, and—save for a resume of its sessions and PERHAPS of FINANCIAL MATTERS—there will be little of importance to report, I shall, if these premises hold good, write a number of consecutive articles providing a review of the conduct of the war in the Crimea so far,612 concerning which I have seen nothing sensible, i.e. critical, either here or from Germany. Moreover, I suppose that this subject is of the greatest general interest and at the same time least liable to lead to a conflict with the indirect Royal Prussian Censorship.

Requesting you to convey my kindest regards to your wife whom I have not had the pleasure of meeting.

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: Rheinische Zeitung



