---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "257. Marx to Engels. 17 January "
Page_Range: "541-543"
---

# 257. Marx to Engels. 17 January 



**[p. 19]**

256

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 January 1855

Dear Frederic,

Yesterday I sent the report on TRADE and COMMERCE to the Tribune' and must now deliver two more articles if I am to pay off my overdraft with the fellows. There are two sailings next week, on Tuesday and Friday,b and it would be most desirable if you could let me have an article on un sujet quelconque0 by Tuesday.

My wife is approaching the catastrophe with a firm tread. Nothing new here. Götz has written to Sidney Herbert asking for an 'officer's brevet' in the apochryphal 'Foreign Legion'.613

Salut.

Your

K. M.

257

London, 17 January 1855

Dear Frederic,

I could not, OF COURSE, write to the Tribune yesterday nor can I do so for some time à venir6 because yesterday morning, between

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, , , . , . ,. . r , r Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX T O ENGELS614

[^3]: IN MANCHESTER

[^4]: K. Marx, 'The Commençai Crisis in Britain', I and II. - b 16 and January - c some subject or other - d to come



Did you know that red Wolffb is one of the Augsburger's London correspondents? I found out by chance, namely by reading an article in the said paperc containing all manner of fatuous elucubrations on 'house' and 'home' and 'abroad'—all this to throw light on the 'ordure' with which the British troops are contending at Balaklava. I saw Freiligrath and told him that in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung I'd read some nonsense of which only Lupus Rufus could be capable. Freiligrath thereupon confirmed that Wolff was the 'REAL, IDENTICAL Kobes'.d

I now have Heine's 3 volumes at home. Amongst other things he retails at some length a lie to the effect that I, etc., went to console hime after he had been 'attacked' in the Augsburg A.Z. for having accepted money from Louis Philippe/ The good Heine deliberately forgets that my intervention on his behalf took place at the end of 1843 614 and thus could have no connection with FACTS which came to light after the February revolution of 1848.615 BUT

LET IT PASS. Worried by his evil conscience,—the old dog has a monstrous memory for such things,—he is trying to ingratiate himself.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: I expect something from you on FRIDAY,8 then. I can't write any more today, having to send out a mass of cards giving notification of the baby's birth.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a Eleanor - b Ferdinand Wolff, also referred to below as Lupus Rufus meaning in Latin 'red wolf - c 'Ein Beitrag zur Charakteristik der Engländer', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 9, 9 January 1855. - d A comparison with the German journalist Venedey lampooned by Heine in his poem 'Kobes I' in 1854. - e Heine, 'Retrospektive Aufklärung', August 1854 (Vermischte Schriften, Bd. 3. Th. 2, S. 144). - f [Report from Paris of 22 April,] Allgemeine Zeiting, No. 119, 28 April 1848, supplement. - B 19 January

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^6]: 18—2736



