---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "258. Marx to Engels. 19 January "
Page_Range: "543-544"
---

# 258. Marx to Engels. 19 January 



**[p. 258]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 19 January 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Agree absolutely—and, indeed, most gratefully—to your scheme.

The parliamentary thing seems likely to misfire for reasons of time. BUT NEVER MIND.

Your yesterday's letter616 didn't reach me until 4 o'clock this afternoon because the ass of a postman (this is the 2nd or 3rd time it has happened, and I shall complain to the POST OFFICE) delivered it to 28 Soho Square instead of 28 Dean Street. In future address your letters to 28 Dean Street, Soho (instead of Soho Square). Because it arrived so late, I can write you no more than these few lines today.

What's this about Barthélémy? I missed it in the Augsburg paper.a Probably a fabrication on the part of the miserable 'Oly' or 'Ody', one of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitungs correspondents, a blackguard from Switzerland.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

There's a tremendous panic in the City, and Freiligrath wrote yesterday telling me that even the most 'sanguine' expect things to be very bad until early spring.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: 3 i.e. 'Die Assisenverhandlung gegen Barthélémy', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 9, 9 January 1855, supplement.



