---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "262. Marx to Engels. 31 January "
Page_Range: "548-553"
---

# 262. Marx to Engels. 31 January 



**[p. 261]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 30 January 1855

Dear Frederic,

I shall send you such cuttings from the Tribune as you will need for a characterisation of the Coalition, and fill in the gaps, if any, with a few written comments.620 I shall hardly get round to it today, since I have to send the Breslau jackasses a résumé of yesterday's frightfully long sitting.3 Also, the BABY11 is in a very critical condition—my wife, however, very well—so that I have been held up by DOMESTIC AFFAIRS until 1 o'clock (now). Which means that in all probability my stuff won't reach you until Thursday morning.

If Palmerston becomes premier, there'll be some high jinks. Did you read Barthélemy's confession in yesterday's Advertiser?

Tout à vousc

Ch. M.

262

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 31 January 1855

Dear Engels,

Enclosed 2 articles on Gladstone's financial policy.621 In the first one, the chaps have clearly misprinted some figures. However, all you are really concerned with is refreshing your memory as to the SPIRIT of the whole plan.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: a i.e. 'From Parliament.—From the Theatre of War' for the Neu« Oder-Zeitung. - b Eleanor - c All yours

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 4]**

December 16? Fall of Disraeli overthrown (by a majority of 19), ostensibly because of the extension of the HOUSE-TAX and the

•EXTENSION OF THE GENERAL AREA OF DIRECT TAXATION'. T h e d e t e r m i n i n g factor, the Irish Brigade 6 2 2

Coalition formed:

* 'We have now arrived at the commencement of the political millennium'* ( Times).b

CHRISTMAS RECESS. February 10. Parliament reassembles. Russell's old programme of 1850. N o question of a Reform Bill623 until they reassembled the following winter.

* 'Next session is not quite so uncertain as tomorrow'* (Times).0

O n the other hand, a mass of practical and administrative reforms promised: law reform, railway regulations, education, etc. Gladstone postpones his budget until after the EASTER RECESS.

February 18.

* 'It is no longer a Ministry of Reform: It is a Ministry of Progress, every member of which resolves to do nothing. All difficult questions are open questions'* (Disraeli).d

21 February. Clarendon FOREIGN MINISTER. Russell Minister without portfolio or salary.

February 24. Russell's Jewish bill.624 * ' T h e Policy of Abstention' proclaimed on the Eastern question, is also the ministerial policy at home.*

Russell retracts.

[^1]: 4 April. RUSSELLS EDUCATIONAL REFORM BILL. 7 April. Before presentation of the budget: GLADSTONE'S FINANCIAL

[^2]: SCHEME.

[^3]: 15 April. Debate in the House on the GUNPOWDER PLOT.380 It transpires that Palmerston is acting as GENERAL INFORMER for the

[^4]: CONTINENTAL POLICE.

[^5]: EASTER RECESS (don't know the date). 31 May. Russell insults Catholics in Parliament.625 Irish mem- bers e resign from Ministry. Aberdeen's letter to them of 3 June. f

[^6]: a 1852 - b The Times, No. 21316, January 1853, leader. - c The Times, No. 21349, 11 February 1853, leader. - d B. Disraeli, [Speech in the House of Commons on 18 February 1853,] The Times, No. 21356, 19 February 1853. - c Keogh, Sadleir, Monsell - f G. Aberdeen, [Letter to Mr Monsell of 3 June 1853,] The Times, No. 21447, 6 June 1853.





**[p. 517]**

2. Budget. Many of its FEATURES lifted from Disraeli, but whereas it removes EXCISE DUTIES for the benefit of the town, Disraeli did so ostensibly for the benefit of the FARMERS; thus the tea DUTY business, extension of direct taxation, etc., of Jewish" origin. Some of the most important decisions forced upon Gladstone after he and his opposition to them had been repeatedly voted down in Parliament. For instance, the abolition of the ADVERTISEMENT DUTY; the SUCCESSION DUTY. LICENSING SYSTEM, NEW REGULATION dropped after undergoing sever- al transformations in the course of the session. Of the budget, which made its début with all the pretensions of a systematic encyclopaedia, nothing remains save a mixtum compositum1' of LITTLE ITEMS. Typical feature: the noble Gladstone includes in his BUDGET a special BILL—abolition of STAMPS ON NEWSPAPER SUPPLEMENTS—intended to buy The Times, in effect making it a present of £30-40,000 a year. Since it alone issues SUPPLEMENTS, consolidates its monopoly. c The Times gratefully abandons its campaign against his INCOME TAX and today is again demanding his inclusion in the new Cabinet.

[^1]: 3. Three Irish LANDLORDS and TENANTS BILLS626 Introduced by the Tory Napier A under the Derby MINISTRY Passed on 1 August after

[^2]: a An allusion to Disraeli. The original has 'Israelite'. - b miscellany - c See K. Marx, 'Soap for the People, a Sop for The Times.—The Coalition Budget', 'Turkey and Russia.— Connivance of the Aberdeen Ministry with Russia.—The Budget.—Tax on Newspaper Supplements.— Parliamentary Corruption'. - d J. Napier, [Speech in the House of Commons on 22 November 1852,] The Times, No. 21280, 23 November 1852.



4. * Parliamentary reform, national education reform, law reform (a few trifles apart) etc. postponed. Transportation Bill,627

Navigation Bill * etc. inherited from the Derby MINISTRY. Jewish bill rejected. Nothing can truly be described as the MINISTRY'S own [save a] the great CAB ACT which had no sooner crossed the threshold than it required revision by Parliament because 'all the talents' of the chaps had not even sufficed to create hackney carriage regulations, ß) Gladstone's conversion of the PUBLIC DEBT,6

the FAILURE of which he had to admit before Parliament as early as 28 JULY628

August 20. (Day of Parliament's PROROGATION—27 October.) Palmerston dismisses the Commons with the assurance that they need not worry about the Eastern affair, * 'as far as the evacuation of the principalities was concerned* their PLEDGE was, *"his confidence in the honour and character of the Russian Emperor", which would move him to withdraw his troops voluntarily from the principalities'*.'

3 December. Sinope.

12 December. Note of the 4 POWERS to the Porte, in which au fondd

14 December. First, Palmerston agrees in the Conseil6 of Ministers to telegraph Vienna, saying the Sinope affair should not be allowed to upset the negotiations; then, in order to deceive the philistines, on

15 December, hands in his RESIGNATION, allegedly because opposed to Russell's REFORM BILL. Returns to office, of course, as soon as his end attained.

1854

[^1]: more was demanded of it than in the Vienna Note.630

[^2]: Mid-January. Resignation of Sadleir, the BROKER to the Irish Brigade, following SCANDALOUS DISCLOSURES before an IRISH COURT OF LAW. Had been Junior Lord of the Treasury. (Later, the VIRTUOUS Gladstone wishes to dispatch to Australia as Governor his relative, Lawley, speculator in stocks while secretary to the CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER a n d BETTING man. Discredited in Parliament. This same

[^3]: a G. Aberdeen, [Speech in the House of Lords on 9 August 1853,] The Times, No. 21503, 10 August 1853. - b Gladstone, [Speech in the House of Commons on 8 April 1853,] The Times, No. 21398, 9 April 1853. - c Palmerston, [Speech in the House of Commons on 20 August 1853,] The Times, No. 21513, 22 August 1853. - d basically - e Council





**[p. 519]**

Beginning of February. Parliament reopens. 6 February. Palmerston announces his intention to introduce a bill for the organisation of the militia in Ireland and Scotland." 28 March. War declared. Bill not introduced until end of June.

13 February. Russell introduces his Reform Bill, which he had made both a condition and an excuse for joining the Coalition. Withdraws it 10 weeks later with 'tears in his eyes'. As a token of gratitude, again made President OF THE PRIVY COUNCIL and gets a salary.

6 March. Gladstone demands

* 'only the sum which would be required to bring back the 25,000 men about to leave the British shores'.*c

DOUBLES THE INCOME TAX FOR 6 MONTHS, MAY 8 has again to introduce a new budget.

Mid-March. T h e Czar d forces the chaps to declare war by publishing the 'SECRET AND CONFIDENTIAL CORRESPONDENCE',631 which opens with a dispatch of 11 January 1853 e and brands as deliberate lies all the statements made by the chaps during 1853.

7 April. Lord Grey (even then minded to become War Minister; notorious for having, as Colonial Minister, brought every English colony to the verge of rebellion) makes his speech in the LORDS' complaining about England's lack of military organisation. This merely provides the Ministers with an opportunity—8 June—of creating one more post and one more salary by separating the MINISTRY FOR WAR g from the COLONIAL MINISTRY without concentration of DEPARTMENTS. Cholera is likewise used as a pretext to create an INDEPENDENT President of the 'Board of Health' and thus a new ministerial post and salary.

[^1]: a Palmerston, [Speech in the House of Commons on 6 February 1854,] The Times, No. 21658, 7 February 1854. - b Russell, [Speeches in the House of Commons on 13 February and 11 April 1854,] The Times, Nos. 21664 and 21713, 14 February and 12 April 1854. - c Gladstone, [Speech in the House of Commons on 6 March 1854,] The Times, No. 21682, 7 March 1854. - d Nicholas I - e Sir G. H. Seymour to Lord J. Russell. St. Petersburg, 11 January 1853, The Times, No. 21693, 20 March 1854. - f Grey, [Speech in the House of Lords on 7 April 1854,] The Times, No. 22720, 8 April 1854. - s The Office of the Secretary of State for War and Colonies was divided into the War Office and the Colonial Office in 1854. The Office of the Secretary of State at War was abolished. The term 'ministry', though used by Marx, was unusual in English in this context.



