---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "263. Marx to Engels. 2 February "
Page_Range: "553-555"
---

# 263. Marx to Engels. 2 February 

* 'Their' * (the Ministers') * 'measures were kicked overboard in a very unceremonious manner'* (Bright).3

Résumé of their domestic activities during this 2nd session: 7 major bills introduced. 3 of them * defeated: bill for the entire change of the law of settlement632; bill for public education in Scotland; bill on the entire reconstruction of Parliamentary oaths.633 3 withdrawn: Bribery Prevention Bill; bill for the complete change of the civil service; measure for Parliamentary Reform. 1 bill—Oxford Parliamentary Reform Bill * passed, in very mutilated and modified form.

August 12. Prorogation of Parliament. Extraordinary December session: Bills relating to the FOREIGN LEGION613 and the Militia.62

A perusal of this list will recall enough facts to enable you to ridicule the fellows and, incidentally, cast a few aspersions on the worthy Palmerston in advance (in case he should become Premier).

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart 19 H Published in English for the first time

263

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 2 February 1855

Dear Frederic,

Many thanks for the article.634 Russell has been horribly discredited by Newcastle, though that ass waxed altogether too touching at the end of his speech.b

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a J. Bright, [Speech in the House of Commons on 29 May 1854,] The Times, No. 21754, 30 May 1854. - b H. Newcastle [Speech in the House of Lords on 1 February 1855,] The Times, No. 21967, 2 February 1855.





**[p. 521]**

Enclosed 1. Letter from Lassalle; 2. from Daniels; 3. the cuttings to which Lassalle refers635; Goldheim has been prowling about among the workers in Solingen etc. under the name of 'Lassalle'. 4. Letter from Steffen who, however, has omitted to give his Brighton address and will begin to grumble again if, in the circumstances, I don't reply.

As a result of the Barbes business Jones, of course, got mixed up with the crapauds,h and with the crapule0 among them at that. So another big banquet of all nations was arranged for the February celebrations.636 He came to see me, too, and I laughed in his face. Meanwhile his Frenchmen (a quite unknown MOB) had dug up the ex-Schapper Association637 which did not, OF COURSE, reject such good graces. Moreover the malcontents among the Polish and Italian émigrés—who are not accounted 'superior refugees'—are said to have organised themselves for the purpose of sending delegates to the Committee.638 For the fun of it, Götz and I let Jones take us to their meeting yesterday, we being designated 'observers'. He introduced us as 'OLD FRIENDS OF THE CHARTIST PARTY' who, doubtless, were entitled to satisfy their curiosity. Who was there? Various crapauds of the basest sort. A Spanish tailor or tobacco manufacturer who had 'convened himself. Stechan (half crazed) and behind him three notorious German louts. Schapper himself being no longer available, Stechan, tried to ape the former's physiognomy, his morose gravity, his gesticulations, as once the butcher Legendre those of Danton. But that was not all.

Herzen the Russian went uninvited to the previous meeting, and (himself) moved that he be nominated a member of the Committee.639 At the meeting we attended, an obsequious letter from him was read out and, because the politically wise Frenchmen thought him 'un garçon charmant',6 he was admitted without further ado. The meeting, the chattering of the Frenchmen, the glazed expressions of the Germans, the gesticula- tions of the Spanish tailor were so awful that Jones (CHAIRMAN) 1. proposed that everyone should speak only once and for not more than ten minutes; 2. upon its being remarked that the Spaniard was not an émigré because democracy had triumphed there, he came out with an ambiguous compliment that 'he wished every émigré community in London a similar lot* so that thus 'no international committees need be maintained' here.

[^1]: a Eleanor - b philistines (see this volume, p. 502) - c dregs - d a charming fellow



