---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "264. Marx to Engels. 13 February "
Page_Range: "555-557"
---

# 264. Marx to Engels. 13 February 



**[p. 522]**

Your

K. Marx

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engeis und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

264

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 February 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Firstly an acknowledgement of receipt of the 'BULLION', and secondly of today's splendid article.b For the past 4-5 days I have been prevented from writing, hence also to you, by a severe inflammation of the eyes which is not yet fully cleared up: also, as a result of the cold weather my USUAL SECRETARY C has not risen from her bed again as quickly as is her wont. However I think that she will shortly be able to return to her post. My eye trouble was brought on by reading through my own note-books on economics,618 the intention being, not so much to elaborate the thing, as at any rate to master the material and get it READY to work on.

I have told you how Herzen elbowed his way on to the 'International Committee'.*1 Enclosed is a letter from him in which he proffers thanks for the 'invitation' which 'was never made'. The letter was intended for publication in The People's Paper in order to assert his importance coram publico? This miscarried, for I immediately wheedled the scrawl out of Jones. However Herzen has had himself nominated a steward.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a true democracy - b F. Engels, 'The Struggle in the Crimea'. - c Jenny Marx - A See previous letter, - e publicly





**[p. 523]**

Jones has done something infinitely 'stupid', indeed gone completely off the rails, in leaving the management of the affair to the crapauds and the German louts. He sacrificed everything to the desire to show, at a big PUBLIC MEETING, that the FOREIGN EMIGRATIONS were in the tow of the Chartists. The MEETING will be a large one and create an uproar, but as a result: 1. Urquhart and Co. (likewise The Times if the thing creates a sensation) will denounce the Chartists as being led by Russian agents. This is unavoidable. 2. It will provide the Ministry with a pretext for reviving the Aliens Bill.75 3. Discord within the Chartist Party. Has already broken out. A section of the London Chartists maintains that Jones has ARBITRARILY departed from the Charter and compromised their whole cause by adopting the slogan 'SOCIAL AND DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC' when forming the branch committee which is to be the CONNECTING LINK between the Chartists and the FOREIGN EMIGRATION.1" There is no denying the extent of Jones' energy, persistence and activity, yet he goes and spoils everything by the way he cries his wares, by his tactless striving after pretexts for agitation and his anxiety to be ahead of the time. If he can't agitate in reality, he seeks an appearance of agitation, improvises MOVEMENTS after MOVEMENTS (SO that, of course, everything remains at a standstill) and periodically works himself up into a state of fictitious exaltation. I have warned him, but in vain.

Mr Golovin—Herzen's fidus Achates0—has inserted in today's Morning Advertiser, under the heading 'February Revolution', a small notice to the effect that

[^1]: 'he has heard that Herzen is to represent Russia, OR RATHER LIBERAL RUSSIA, at the banquet. His name alone betrays that he is a German, or rather a German Jew.

[^2]: a philistines - b A reference to 'The Alliance of the Peoples. The International Committee', The People's Paper, No. 145, 10 February 1855. - c faithful Achates (Virgil, Aeneid)



