---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "265. Marx to Engels. 3 March "
Page_Range: "557-559"
---

# 265. Marx to Engels. 3 March 



**[p. 524]**

If, as the Paris correspondent writes in the 2ND EDITION of today's Morning Chronicle^ Bonaparte minorc assumes personally the supreme command of the Army of the Rhine against Prussia, the 'campagne' might end badly for the French.

Your

K. M.

First published slightly abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

265

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 3 March 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Frederic,

On Tuesday0 you will be hearing from me at some length. Today no more than these few lines to explain the reasons for my silence:

1. Musche has had a dangerous gastric fever which he has still not shaken off (this is the worst of all).

2. The BABY^GREW EVERY DAY WORSE and was disturbing the whole household so that a few days ago a change of wet nurse became necessary.

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a I. Golovin, 'To the Editor of The Morning Advertiser', in the section 'February Revolution', The Morning Advertiser, 13 February 1855. - b 'Express from Paris', The Morning Chronicle, No. 27499, 13 February 1855. - c nickname of Napoleon III given to him by Victor Hugo - d 6 March - c Edgar - f Eleanor





**[p. 525]**

4. First I had my eye trouble, now more or less over; then such a frightful cough that I had to swallow several bottles of medicine and even keep to my bed for a few days.

So you see the whole house was and, to some extent still is, a hospital.

I shall get you Herzen's stuff641; likewise yesterday's People's Paper, in which you can read about Jones' and Herzen's COMMON PROCEEDINGS3 Should I throw Jones out if he comes again, or should I proceed 'diplomatically'?

The doctor says I need a change of air, not having left the PRECINCTS OF SOHO SQUARE for 2 years. So I should like to visit Manchester before my wife goes to Trier again. Should you, in view of your old man's impending arrival or for any other reason, find it awkward to put me up, I could take a room in Manchester. I must at any rate—but not, of course, until everything's all right here—get away from this place for a while, since the physical staleness also stultifies my brain.

Que dites-vous de la mort de Nicholas?h I like the way The Times insinuates that his death was partly due to fright because HIS WORST ENEMY-—Palmerston—has become Premier of England.0

K. M.

Have heard nothing from Cluss for months.

[^1]: Vale faveque.d

[^2]: Totus tuus,e

[^3]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart l Qi « Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 'Immense Demonstration in St. Martin's Hall', The People's Paper, No. 148, 3 March 1855. - b What do you say to the death of Nicholas? - c The Times, No. 21992, 3 March 1855, leader. - d Good-bye and farewell. - e All yours



