---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "266. Marx to Engels. 8 March "
Page_Range: "559-561"
---

# 266. Marx to Engels. 8 March 



**[p. 266]**

MARX TO ENGELS234

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 March 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

Received the £5. I cannot get away until COLONEL Musch is visibly recovered. However, this week he has made rapid strides towards convales- cence, today the doctor was EXCEEDINGLY PLEASED, and next week everything may be ALL RIGHT. As soon as I can depart with a good conscience, I shall write to you. Next week, I imagine.

Yesterday we were informed of A VERY HAPPY EVENT, the death of my wife's uncle, aged 90.a As a result, my mother-in-lawb will save an annual impost of 200 talers and my wife will get almost £100; more if the old dog hasn't made over to his housekeeper such of his money as is not entailed. Another question which will be settled is that of the Duke of Brunswick's manuscript on the Seven Years' War, for which old Scharnhorst has already offered large sums. My wife immediately registered a protest against any attempts by her brother' to make a present of it to 'His Most Gracious Highness'.d Let the Prussian state acquire it for cash BUT

There is a prospect of another possible source of money. My wife had deposited 1,300 talers with one Grach, a banker in Trier. The fellow went bankrupt and, in her case, had acted fraudulently, since he was already insolvent (although unbeknown to the public) when he accepted her deposit. On the urgent plea of the wife of this Grach, my wife 'relented' and refrained from pursuing the matter in the courts. The Chief Public Prosecutor had stated that Grach would otherwise be brought before the Assizes. This Grach's wife has now inherited a large fortune and, if she keeps her promise, we can count on the recovery of at least part of the loss. In any case this will mean that the 'past' has been discharged once and for all and a weight lifted from our shoulders.

Napoleon Bonaparte'se pamphlet—(Girardin denies in La Presse that he is the faiseur1)—amused me very much.642 Despite the

[^1]: NOT OTHERWISE.

[^2]: a Heinrich Georg von Westphalen - b Caroline von Westphalen - c Ferdinand von Westphalen - d Frederick William IV - e Joseph Charles Paul Napoleon Bonaparte - f maker





**[p. 527]**

T h e r e is one point you might clear u p for m e about the Crimean business, namely: General Evans declared before the committee b that the main reason for the MELTING OF THE ARMY before Sevastopol was the absence of a road from the harbour of Balaklava; 1,000 men would have sufficed to build one in 10 days, but—et c'est la question^—ALL MEN WHO COULD HAVE BEEN SPARED WERE EMPLOYED IN THE TRENCHES, and from the start the extent of the lines to be captured by the English was grossly disproportionate TO THEIR NUMERICAL STRENGTH. T h e question is: Could the French be regarded as the CONTRIVERS of this MISCHIEF?

A short while ago I took another look at Roman history (ancient) u p to the time of Augustus.643 Internal history resolves itself PLAINLY into the struggle between small and large landed property, specifically modified, of course, by slavery relations. Debtor-creditor relations, which play so large a part from the origines of Roman history, figure merely as an inherent conse- quence of small landed property.

Today 1 saw an advertisement for 3 works by Forster, a parson, all having in common the title Original Language. As you will have seen, Mr Herzen is now having himself puffed in the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung also.d At the same time his SPEECH (at Jones' meeting) is appearing in The People's Paper as a fly-sheet and in père Ribeyrolles' estimable L'Homme."

K. M.

[^1]: Your

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English in full for the Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, " r s t t l m e Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a meaning Napoleon III - b G. Evans de Lacy, [Evidence given before the Committee of Inquiry into the Condition of the British Army in the Crimea,] The Times, Nos. 21994 and 21995, 6 and 7 March 1855. - c and that is the question - d i.e. 'Der Russe Herzen', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 63, 4 March 1855. - e Discours d'Alexandre Herzen, exilé russe, prononcé au meeting tenu le 27 février 1855 dans St. Martin's Hall, à Londres, en commemoration des grands mouvements révolutionnaires de 1848 [s. 1., s. a.], published on the Island of Jersey; L'Homme, No. 14, 7 March 1855.



