---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "269. Marx to Engels. 30 March "
Page_Range: "562-563"
---

# 269. Marx to Engels. 30 March 



**[p. 529]**

Warmest regards from the whole family, Musch included. Tell Lupus that Furrer, the Swiss with whom he used to be in touch, has gone bankrupt and actually done his resident tutor out of £14.

Vale faveque."

Totus tuus,h

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

269

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 30 March 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

From day to day I have put off sending you a bulletin0 because the ups and downs of the illness were such that I changed my opinion almost hourly. Latterly, however, the illness has assumed the character, hereditary in my family, of an abdominal consump- tion, and even the doctor seems to have given up hope. For the past week emotional stress has made my wife iller than ever before. As for myself, though my heart is bleeding and my head afire, I must, of course, maintain my composure. Never for one moment throughout his illness has the child been untrue to his own good-natured, and at the same time independent, self.

As for you, I cannot thank you enough for the kindness with

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Good-bye and farewell. - b All yours - c on Edgar Marx's condition



