---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "274. Marx to Engels. 16 May "
Page_Range: "568-569"
---

# 274. Marx to Engels. 16 May 

In the same context the Berlin 'Critical Criticism'11 will be lambasted for its arrogant stupidity.

Your

K. M.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time

274

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 16 May 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

My wife is most unwell; the household in general still very upset. From the day we left Manchester645 the weather here has beert unremittingly awful.

until you have sent him his 'rubbers'. The Tetermann'b got packed by mistake. Would already have been returned to you if I hadn't wanted to send it at the same time as the Bruno Bauer. Tell me how you wish it done. If you send the little fool his shoes, you might at the same time send me the Decker, which I forgot.c

I have written to Breslau.647 No answer yet. In the meantime write and tell me in greater detail how many sheets—whether in separate volumes or ALL TOGETHER—, charges, etc.609

[^1]: Dronke, the litde fool, refuses to send you the Bruno Bauer646

[^2]: a Bruno Bauer (see also Note 535) - b Mittheilungen aus Justus Perthes' geographischer Anstalt über wichtige neu« Erforschungen auf dem Gesammtgebiete der Geographie, edited by A. Petermann. - c C. Decker, Der kleine Krieg, im Geiste der neueren Kriegführung, Oder: Abhandlung über die Verwendung und den Gebrauch aller drei Waffen im kleinen Kriege.



