---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "275. Marx to Engels. 18 May "
Page_Range: "569-570"
---

# 275. Marx to Engels. 18 May 

Herewith 1. The Sunday Times on the 'Soho scorpions'. 2. A cutting from The People's Paper3 in which you may read about Mr Jones' curious negotiations with the City reformers,648 and 'how he was brought down' (clearly the chaps wanted to have the working plebs standing in the street outside their doors as mere super- numeraries, just for SHOW and to demonstrate their movement's popularity). The business is VERY CURIOUS INDEED.

Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

The Political Fly-Sheetsb have now come out as a book. In the foreword Mr Tucker thanks me by namec which, with an Aliens Bill75 in the offing, is NOT QUITE RECOMMENDATORY.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

275

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 18 Mayd 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

My wife has been confined to bed since yesterday evening. As I cannot draw a bill before a week on Tuesday (next),e I should be much obliged if you could send me some money (however little).

The devil take the Tribune] Certainly it is now absolutely essential that it should adopt an anti-pan-Slav line.649 If it doesn't,

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a i.e. E. Jones, 'Political Felony. Infamous Chicanery and Fraud of the Administra- tive Reform Association', The People's Paper, No. 158, 12 May 1855. - b See this volume, pp. 407-08, 432, 455 and 473. - c Tucker's Political Fly-Sheets, London, 1855, p. 1. - d March in the original. - c 22 May



