---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "276. Marx to Engels. 15 June "
Page_Range: "570-571"
---

# 276. Marx to Engels. 15 June 



**[p. 10]**

As you will have seen in an earlier no. of the Augsburg Allgemeine,3 as from next August, the great Herzen will be bringing out a Russian periodical here, the Polar Star}1

My warm regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, . Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

276

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 15 June [1855] 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

enclosed herewith, you will see that he is asking for 1. a column on the Prussian army for the Tribune, 2. a sheet on all the European armies for Putnam's Review.6 If you have no time to do the latter, you must send me the material and I shall have to do it.651 It is true that, in the latter case, my unfamiliarity with the subject would make for a sorry result, but I cannot let slip the £10 to be earned in this way, for, on the one hand, no money is yet coming in from the legacy and, on the other, expenses have been very heavy; added to which there has been a loss of earnings, since the worthy Dronke did not keep the Neue Oder-Zeitung supplied during my absence (despite his promise) and, as to the Tribune itself, there was still an overdraft outstanding (only cleared off by today's poste).

[^1]: Your articlec just arrived (4 o'clock in the afternoon). Our inebriated postman had already passed the door when Lenchen grabbed him and took away the letter. From Dana's letter,650

[^2]: a 'Großbritannien. London, 6 Mai', Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 130, May 1855. - b TJojutp HOH aeezda - c F. Engels, 'Napoleon's War Plans'. - d Putnam's Monthly - e by Engels' article 'Napoleon's War Plans'



