---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "277. Marx to Engels. 26 June "
Page_Range: "571-572"
---

# 277. Marx to Engels. 26 June 

For Lupus: Lost his bet. The pubs here open at 1 o'clock on Sundays, not half past twelve.

These lines in great haste. More in my next.

Your

K. M.

Apropos: Bruno Bauer has brought out a pamphlet on the Russian Church.b

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- , . ,. , , roi3 Published in English for the first time

277

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 June 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I did not send off any article last Fridayc because [articles dispatched] simultaneously from London and Manchester would have aroused the fellows' suspicions. On Tuesday (last)d I sent off an article of an entirely general nature on Bonaparte's diplomacy, the treaties of 1815 and the Prussian Field Marshal Knesebeck.e

Next Friday8 it will be virtually impossible to avoid writing a military piece about the affair at Malakhov and Redan on the anniversary of Waterloo.652 Tomorrow and the day after I shall go

[^1]: For at the Congress of Vienna the latter cracked some good jokes about the Poles.f

[^2]: a Mittheilungen aus Justus Perthes' geographischer Anstalt - b B. Bauer, Die russische Kirche, Charlottenburg, 1855. - c 22 June - d 19 June - e K. Marx, 'Eccentricities of Polities'. - f A reference to F. Knesebeck's Denkschrift, betreffend die Gleich- gewichts-Lage Europa's, beim Zusammentritte des Wiener Congresses verfaßt, pp. 13- 14. - « 29 June



