---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "279. Marx to Engels. 3 July "
Page_Range: "573-575"
---

# 279. Marx to Engels. 3 July 

I have got together all manner of stuff, some of which may be of use.

Salut

Your

K. M.

Where Minutoli (Baron) quoted, reference is to his book: Spanien und seine fortschreitende Entwicklung etc., Berlin, 1852.

I believe it's that swine of a policeman. Was and still may be Prussian Consul General in SPAIN and Portugal.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart 191S Published in English for the first time

279

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 3 July 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

The £5 received on Monday. For 3 days I have been rummaging through a mass of stuff at the Museum651 without finding anything about the Neapolitan army save for the following, which may also be found in Mac Culloch's Dictionary Geographical, Statistical etc.

In 1848 the army NEARLY 49,000 strong (this seems to be its war footing, as I find it given {in a Dizionario Politico, Turin} as 26-27,000 strong in 1840). Of these, 32,000 INFANTRY OF THE LINE, 5,000 CAVALRY, 4,000 ARTILLERY AND ENGINEERS, and 8,000 gendarmes. They claim to be able to increase their army to 64,237 and this is given as the official war footing.

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER





**[p. 541]**

There might be something more detailed in Mariotti. But I couldn't get hold of it as it was always 'IN HAND' whenever I asked for it.

Our tamily life here is still melancholy. My wife still very unwell. The memory of our poor, dear childc torments us, and even interposes itself in his sisters"1 play. Such blows can only be mitigated slowly, with the passage of time. To me the loss is as poignant as on the first day and hence I can tell how much my wife is suffering. Should the Scotch money6 arrive in time I shall spend a few weeks in Kent, where plenty of cheap and pleasantly situated places are said to be available.

The scenes in Hyde Park last Sunday were DISGUSTING, firstly because of the CONSTABLES' brutality, and secondly because of the purely passive resistance put up by the huge crowds.655 However, things are clearly seething and fermenting and we can only hope that great disasters in the Crimea will bring them to a head.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Published in English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, t i m e

[^2]: Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^3]: a Francis I - b Ferdinand II - c Edgar (see this volume, p. 530) - d Jenny and Laura - e ,vn allusion to the Scottish origin of the Westphalens; see also p. 526.



