---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "280. Marx to Engels. 17 July "
Page_Range: "575-576"
---

# 280. Marx to Engels. 17 July 



**[p. 280]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 July 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Engels,

Strohn is here and, unfortunately, prevents me from sending an ARTICLE to the Tribune today. I therefore intend to send off on Friday,3 under Tuesday's date, an article on the latest ministerial crisis, and I should be very grateful if, at the same time, you would send me one on, say, the Prussian army (assuming that nothing occurs in the theatre of war),b so that 2 articles go off at once. For I shall be compelled to draw a bill on the Tribune next week, or rather overdraw and appreciably so at that, as I had already overdrawn last time, and this time several days have been missed.

A German returning from Yankeeland, Gustav Pöckel, brought me a line or two from Edgarc and more detailed news about him and other acquaintances. Of late, Edgar had been working as a farm labourer near New York and intended to sell his farm in Texas. Schramm d is said to be dying of consumption and is also in New York State. Ewerbeck passed through about eighteen months ago on his way to visit Cabet in Nauvoo. Fickler took over the Shakespeare Hotel after Lièvre went bankrupt, making the most of the occasion to do the dirty on him. Jacobi V affairs are prospering; the Yankees like his 'serious' and 'reserved' manner. Field Marshal Blenker and a few other notorious swindlers from the days of the revolution comedy have bought up real estate with the stolen funds and, as regards swagger and brutality towards their workpeople, are said to put the Yankees completely in the shade. Heinzen has re-established himself in New York with his Pionier. All in all, things are going very badly for the Germans over there, at one and the same time harassed by the Maine Law, KNOW-NOTHINGS656 and the crisis in agriculture and industry. Hence a substantial re-emigration to Germany, Canada and South America.

Through the mediation of German merchants in Paris (one of them a supporter of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung) Dronke has

[^1]: a 20 July - b On Marx's request Engels wrote 'War Prospects'. - c Edgar von Westphalen - d Conrad Schramm - e Abraham Jacobi



