---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "281. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 July "
Page_Range: "576-577"
---

# 281. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 28 July 



**[p. 543]**

Imandt is in Scotland for 4 weeks on a visit to Heise. He has placed his COTTAGE in Camberwell at my disposal in the meantime. The whole FAMILY will move there and avail themselves of the change of air until we can afford something bigger.

As to the enclosed letters:

No. I. From Lassalle in Paris. No. II. I send you for your amusement Szeredy's Asiatic Chiefs, together with the fellow's appeal to me.657

No. III. Letter from Florencourt (the only one you need return). Contains an account of how things stand with the legacy.3 You will observe on the one hand that the legacy has increased by £515, while on the other all manner of delays are militating against its rapid realisation. This Florencourt is not the notorious one,b but his brother.

Your

K. M.

Do you know of any book on the êtresc of LITTLE Johnny Russell?658

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

Dear Lassalle,

I have been staying in the country for the past few weeks in a cottage lent me by a friende who is away in Scotland. That is why I did not get your letter until yesterday. I have, incidentally, taken

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English for the first time 281

[^2]: IN PARIS

[^3]: London, 28 July 1855 28 Dean Street, Sohod

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 526 and 541. - b Franz von Florencourt - c life and doings - d The letter is written in Camberwell near London but datelined London. - c Peter Imandt (see previous letter)

[^5]: 19*



