---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "282. Marx to Engels. 7 August "
Page_Range: "577-578"
---

# 282. Marx to Engels. 7 August 



**[p. 544]**

I am, of course, surprised to hear that, despite your proximity to London, you are not thinking of coming over here, if only for a few days. I hope that you will think it over again and discover how short and cheap the journey from Paris to London is. If France's doors were not hermetically closed against me, I would pay you a surprise visit in Paris.

I have several friends in Paris, but I.shall not be able to send you their addresses (I am not in town at the moment of writing) until I go to Soho, where I keep them.

Bacon says that really important people have so many relations to nature and the world, so many objects of interest, that they easily get over any loss. I am not one of those important people. The death of my childa has shattered me to the very core and I feel the loss as keenly as on the first day. My poor wife is also completely BROKEN DOWN.

If you see Heine again, give him my regards.

Your

K. M.

First published in the Frankfurter Zeitung, Printed according to the original 10 August 1913

282

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 7 August 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

The FAMILY (hence, for the most part, (Tlyself also) still in Camberwell. Pieper came and stayed with us for a week. I was thus prevented from writing, save for the necessary pieces for New York AND GERMANY. The article on the 'ARMIES' is splendid.0

From the enclosed letter from Steffen you will see what a bad state our friend Daniels and Bürgers are in. I am particularly sorry about the first. I don't know whether, in my résumé of the

[^1]: Published in Etiglish for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: Edgar - b F. Engels, 'The Armies of Europe'.



