---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "283. Marx to Engels. 1 September "
Page_Range: "578-580"
---

# 283. Marx to Engels. 1 September 



**[p. 545]**

In the past weeks I have sent the Tribune a series of articles—i.e. 3—about Lord John Russell in which the little man is passed in review from the very beginning.659 However, it will soon be necessary to say SOME WORDS about the war and also, perhaps, about how the affaire is going in Asia.

Dronke has suffered a bitter disappointment. For it eventually transpired that the issue of a passport to Paris had been due to a misunderstanding on the part of the French Embassy; rather, express instructions had been given that he was not to be admitted into France. In a few days it will be decided whether or not he has obtained a post in Jersey.

Bonaparte has, within the bounds of pure reason, solved the problem I set him, namely 'to steal the whole of France in order to make a present of it to France again'.b His manoeuvrings over the loan are significant experiments in that direction.

What do you think of the Austrian concentration of troops in Italy? Have you seen the 2nd Mémoire d'un Officier Général?660

Your

K. M.

283

MARX TO ENGELS

Camberwell

Dear Frederic,

Imandt has gone off to Montrose and chucked up his whole CONCERN here for the highly dubious prospect of a post in

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: 1 September 1855 3 York Place, Denmark,c

[^4]: a Pöckel (see this volume, p. 542) - b Marx quotes from his Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (see present edition, Vol. 11, p. 195). - c Should be: Denmark street (see this volume, pp. 547 and 550).



Received your article15 yesterday. The Russian report is now in all the Hamburg papers as well.

As regards Putnam's, we must now get a move on. In a letter I got from Dana he already evinced anxiety lest No. 2C should arrive too late. But it was there on time, as I see from a subsequent letter.d Putnam has asked for another article on 'THE IMPROVEMENTS IN MODERN WARFARE'. The New-York Times contains criti- cism which is generally favourable, but clearly grudging: off duty, Englishmen don't wear 'narrow trousers', their squadrons number more than 400 SABRES, and a ? after 'SABRES' too, and, lastly, the writer seems to be unaware that in England flogging is now restricted to 50 strokes and is inflicted only in exceptional cases. The business at Aldershot where, ABOUT H DAYS ago, a SOLDIER died from 30 strokes of the lash, is comment enough on the criticus concerning whose nonsense I have sent Dana the requisite observations.661

Have you been following Napier's row with Graham? The 1st article was in The Times, the 2nd in the Advertiser and the Herald?62 Today the Advertiser's first LEADER contains the exchange of letters between Charley and James. A reply from Graham to Napier's first articles is also, it seems, to appear in one of today's papers.

I wonder whether you have noticed that the Austrians made use of the time they were deploying their armies in Galicia to construct, under Hess' general supervision, railways of solely strategic importance; likewise fortifications directed against Russia.

I hope that you will now write and tell me something about yourself and your doings.

Your

K. M.

Unless I am mistaken, our Koscielski also appears in Pélissier's battle report.'

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 526. - b F. Engels, 'The Battle of the Chernaya'. - c F. Engels, 'The Armies of Europe', Second Article. - d Dana to Marx, 7 August 1855. Dana's second letter has not been found. - e A. Pélissier, [Report on the Battle of the Chernaya. 18 August 1855,] The Times, No. 22146, 30 August 1855.



