---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "284. Marx to Engels. 6 September "
Page_Range: "580-581"
---

# 284. Marx to Engels. 6 September 

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

284

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

6 September 1855 3 York Place, Denmark Street (not Hill, which is merely the GENERAL NAME for the whole place) Camberwell

Dear Engels,

You may already have read about the death of our friend Daniels in the Kölnische Zeitung.h He is no more nor less than a victim of the infamies of the Prussian Police. I shall be writing a few lines to his wife,c and you must do the same. Address: Frau Doktorin Amalie Daniels, Schildergasse, Köln. It would be desirable if Lupus did likewise. I know by experience how welcome letters from friends are at such a time. I shall write a short obituary of our poor friend for the Tribune. So far as the German-American Press is concerned, I think the best plan would be to insert in the New York Neue Zeit (nominally edited by Bernhardt, in fact by Löwe of Calbe) a brief obituary notice signed by you, Freiligrath, Lupus and myself. Also to denounce the proceedings against Bürgers.

You will have heard that O'Connor died a few days ago. Jones' wife is mortally ill. The poor devil is AT THIS MOMENT IN

A STEAMER is leaving on Tuesday. It is essential in the case of Putnam's that the thing should be in New York by 10th October at

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: DESPERATE CIRCUMSTANCES.

[^2]: a The Times, No. 22148, 1 September 1855. - b Kölnische Zeitung, 30 August 1855. - c See this volume, pp. 548-49.



