---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "285. Marx to Amalie Daniels. 6 September "
Page_Range: "581-583"
---

# 285. Marx to Amalie Daniels. 6 September 



**[p. 548]**

In The Morning Advertiser, Blind continues 'TO SHAKE THE DESPOTIC

POWERS OF EUROPE TO THEIR VERY FOUNDATIONS'.

A German rag has reappeared in London, the actual rédacteur en chef" being the ill-famed Sigmund Engländer, of Paris police memory. Chief contributors: Ronge, the Russian Herzen and a drunkard by the name of Korn, allegedly an ex-captain.663

Vale.d

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

285

MARX TO AMALIE DANIELS

IN COLOGNE

London, 6 September 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

My Dear Mrs Daniels,

It is impossible to describe the grief I felt on hearing that dear, unforgettable Roland had passed away. Although the latest news reaching me through Steffen had been far from reassuring/ I did

Printed according to the original

[^1]: a Putnam's Monthly for August 1855, containing the first article in Engels' series 'The Armies of Europe', which is referred to here. - b See this volume, p. 546. - c chief editor - d Farewell. - e See this volume, pp. 544-45.

[^2]: Published in English for the first time



I am sufficiently acquainted with your heroic nature to be convinced that imperishable grief will not prevent you from remaining the loyal guardian of the beloved pledges left you by Roland. In his sons you will compensate the world twice over for the loss of the father.

The news of this new loss has revived in my wife such vivid memories of the death of our only little sona that her state of mind does not permit of her writing to you just now. She is weeping and lamenting like a child.

Consolation I will not venture to offer you since I myself am and shall remain inconsolable for [the] loss of a friend who was more dear to me personally than any other. Grief such as this cannot be alleviated, but only shared. As soon as I get over my first stormy emotions, I shall send an obituary to the New-York Tribune for the many friends of the departed in America. It is to be hoped that circumstances will some day permit us to wreak upon those guilty of cutting short his career vengeance of a kind sterner than that of an obituary.

You will need no assurance on my part that you can always count on me as a loyal and devoted friend.

With my heartfelt sympathy,

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Worfes, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Edgar



