---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "287. Marx to Moritz Eisner. 11 September "
Page_Range: "583-587"
---

# 287. Marx to Moritz Eisner. 11 September 



**[p. 286]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

11 September 1855 3 York Place, Denmark Street, Camberwell

Dear Engels,

Like the Russians, I have been compelled by force supérieure TO EVACUATE THE SOUTHERN SIDE without, however, blowing everything up behind me.664 Indeed, my garrison will remain quietly here, whither I also propose to return IN A WEEK OR SO. In other words, I am obliged to withdraw to Manchester for a few days and shall arrive there tomorrow evening. I shall have to stay there incognito, so don't let anyone know about my presence—Lupus, OF COURSE, EXCEPTED, should you by chance see him.

I have amended your letter3 just received, to accord with the latest telegraphic dispatches.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

287

Dear Eisner,

It was impossible for me to write last week because of legal proceedings taken against me by the worthy Dr Freund. He has actually compelled me to leave London for a week or so. During

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO MORITZ ELSNER665

[^3]: IN BRESLAU

[^4]: London, 11 September 1855 28 Dean Street, Sohob

[^5]: a F. Engels, 'The Fall of Sevastopol'. - b The letter is written in Camberwell but datelined London.



m

'«•M&LJ ö i .

.*P!

[^1]: Moritz Eisner





It goes without saying that, should your paper cease to pay yet still remain viable, my contributions will be at your disposal then as now.

Considering the difficult circumstances and the limited space at your disposal, your paper is, in my opinion, edited with great skill and tact, and in such a way that the intelligent reader may read between the lines. Nothing can be more fatuous than to censure you for receiving 'constitutional' money. Some very 'constitutional' citizens paid in shares for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. If these gentlemen subsequently came to regret it, they were at least never forbidden by the editorial board to go on paying.

If I were not so afraid of compromising this or that acquaintance by the mere fact of corresponding with him, I should long since have written to the Rhine Province in the interests of your paper. At all events, Lassalle did wrong in failing to draw attention to the Neue Oder-Zeitung in Cologne, etc. Circumstances would have allowed him to do so.

Should the N. O.-Z. go under, we shall have to console ourselves with the thought that all our present doings, activities and beginnings are purely provisional and no more than a pis aller.

With kindest regards.

Yours

K. M.

A German weekly rag has been started in London, its founder being the French ex(?)-policeman and Viennese refugee, Sigmund Engländer. Contributors: the Russian Herzen, Johannes Ronge and a drunkard by the name of Korn, allegedly a capitaine^

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



