---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "288. Marx to Moritz Eisner. 8 November "
Page_Range: "587-589"
---

# 288. Marx to Moritz Eisner. 8 November 



**[p. 288]**

MARX TO MORITZ ELSNER

IN BRESLAU

Manchester, 8 November 1855 34 Butler Street, Green Keys

Dear Eisner,

I have received both your letters,666 the first somewhat belatedly because my wife accidentally delayed sending it on to Manchester. After receiving your first letter I thought you had resigned from the Neue Oder-Zeitung and for that reason at once ceased to send any articles. When your second letter arrived I was suffering from such a FIT of toothache—which persisted until a few days ago—that I could no more write than I could hear or see.

I passed on your letter of 7 October not only to friends but also to adversaries, and the latter seemed thoroughly taken aback. That I and my friends are in no way affected by the dogmas of Messrs Temme and Simon of Breslau you will readily believe without any further assurance from me.

I do not see Hoyoll, but Lupus does—from time to time. Patriotism has led this Hoyoll to introduce the Breslauer Zeitung into the Athenaeum244 here, a circumstance which threatens to drive our little Wolffa out of what is virtually the only home of the Muses in Manchester.

I have conveyed your greetings to Borchardt, whom I know well. Borchardt maintains a regular and intimate correspondence with Citizen Simon of Breslau. Upon his first asking me whether I knew that the N. O.-Z. lived in sin with the constitutionals, I replied: 'Qu'est ce que ça me fait? h Don't you know that, in my view, constitutionals and democrats, at least of the Prussian variety, are all much of a muchness? And is a distinction now to be drawn between democrats who have accepted one royal imposition while rejecting another and those who, having submitted to the one, also submit to the other?667 The N. O.-Z. expresses the most extreme views possible in the present condition of the Press. What more do you ask?'

I have had letters from particularly well-informed people in Paris. According to them, the Empire's stock is sinking lower and

[^1]: Wilhelm Wolff - b What's that to me?





**[p. 555]**

As for the scandal here over the 'refugee question' (Jersey, etc.), there's more smoke to it than fire.668 PUBLIC OPINION has definitely turned against the GOVERNMENT and, in fact, I believe that this was allowed for in the latter's calculations. So crassly, with such tragi-comical mouthings, did they accede to Bonaparte's first demands, as virtually to demonstrate that further concessions were not within the power of an English government. Had they been in earnest, they would have shown themselves more adroit and not have carried out the grotesque coup so long before the opening of Parliament. Palmerston, OF COURSE, has no love for the refugees, but regards them as wind-bags to be kept to hand so that he may occasionally threaten the Continent with a 'Quos ego!'ä His ministerial position, by the by, is exceedingly precarious. But it will still be difficult to unseat the old fox.

When you next write, kindly send your letter to my old address, 28 Dean Street, Soho, London, since I don't know how long I shall be remaining here, and letters sent to the above address will in any case come into the hands of my wife. Ronge is running kindergartens in London along with his wife; Kinkel, no less than Johanna,6 hopes that the revolution will not be unduly precipitate; in Brighton, Ruge gives an occasional lecture, leading the English to believe that the German language is the most debased of all; Tausenau, Meyen et tutti quanti1 abuse the French emigre 'riff-raff (not excluding Victor Hugo) for imperilling the 'right of asylum' of these 'officially authorised conspirators'.

Engels and Lupus send you their warmest regards. I haven't seen Borchardt for a fortnight.

Yours

[^1]: K. M. First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first '__ time a 'This fellow will go' (paraphrase of the eighteenth-century French revolutionary song Ça irai). - b [G. Rouland,] Discours de M. le Procureur Général, Journal des débats politiques et littéraires, 5 November 1855. - c 'On the terrors of the future revolution'. - d 'Those whom' (cf. Virgil, Aeneid, I, 135). - e Kinkel's wife - f and all the rest



