---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "289. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 8 November "
Page_Range: "589-590"
---

# 289. Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle. 8 November 



**[p. 289]**

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN DÜSSELDORF

Manchester, 8th November 1855 34 Butler Street, Green Keys

Dear Lassalle,

Herewith a very belated answer. In the first place, I did not get your letters 669 until later because I was in Manchester whereas the letters were in London and my wife did not know for certain whether I hadn't already left Manchester. For another thing, I was plagued by the most atrocious toothache, so much so that I experienced what Hegel demands of sensual consciousness at the stage at which it is said to override consciousness of self—viz. the inability to hear, see, and therefore also to write.

As regards your query about the book entitled: Les mystères de la Bourse by Coffinières, I believe that this miserable concoction is still among the books I left behind in the fatherland. During my first stay in Paris670 the title misled me first into buying the thing and then into reading it. Mr Coffinières is a lawyer who, au fond,3

knows nothing about the Bourse and merely warns against the 'legal' swindles perpetrated by the 'agents de changé? So there's nothing to be got out of the book—neither FACTS, nor theory, nor yet even entertaining anecdotes. Moreover, it is now completely out-of-date. 'Sweet Donna, let him go'—i.e. Coffinières. 'He is not worthy of thy wrath'.c

Weerth is now back in Manchester after a lengthy journey via the Continent (he returned from the West Indies at the end of July). In a week's time he will be off to the tropics again. It's very amusing to hear him talk. He has seen, experienced and observed much. Ranged over the better part of South, West and Central America. Crossed the Pampas on horseback. Climbed Chimborazo. Likewise stayed in California. If he no longer writes feuilletons,671 he makes up for it by recounting them, and his audience has the benefit of vivacious gesture, mime and waggish laughter. He is, by the by, full of enthusiasm for life in the West Indies and hasn't a good

[^1]: a at bottom - b stockbrokers - c Words of Leporello in Mozart's Don Giovanni, Act I (libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte).



