---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "290. Marx to Engels. 7 December "
Page_Range: "590-592"
---

# 290. Marx to Engels. 7 December 



**[p. 557]**

You will have read in the papers about the Jersey affair668 and the general to-do over the refugee question in England. I don't believe that this affair will take a serious turn. Nor, for that matter, do I believe that the government here had a serious end in view. Otherwise the row would have been saved up until just before the opening of Parliament. As it is, PUBLIC OPINION has been given time to swing back and, in many respects, has already done so.

Send your next letter to my old address in London as I'm not sure how long I shall stay up here with friend Engels. He and Lupus send you their warm regards.

Your

K. M.

First published in: F. Lassalle, Nachgelas- Printed according to the original sene Briefe und Schriften, Bd. III, Stutt- gart-Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time

290

MARX TO ENGELS

London, 7 December 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

Thus, since my arrival here, I have been incarcerated within 4 walls which, after all, I can't spend the whole day haranguing. But just now it would be too risky to venture out of doors.

The documenta did not go off to the Union Bank until the day before yesterday. The delay was caused by all sorts of little things.

No reply yet from America, i.e. New York. The gentlemen would appear to be 'deliberating*.b No letter from Washington, but

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: Jones does not appear to be in London. At least, I haven't had an answer, either oral or written, to an urgent written enquiry.6 2

[^3]: a Presumably concerning Mrs Marx's inheritance (see this volume, p. 526). - b See next letter.





**[p. 558]**

Since ABOUT the time of my return here, the Advertiser has been the arena for a cockfight between Herzen and an anonymous antagonist. His antagonist reproaches him with being a humbug and having passed himself off as a kind of Russian Silvio Pellico.a

Even the title of his book 67S is said to be a lie, inasmuch as he has never been in Siberia, etc. Feeble reply from Herzen b: the title was humbug on the PUBLISHER'S part, he [Herzen] had not been responsible for it and had immediately protested in the Globe,c etc. against the attributes wrongly ascribed to him, etc. Whereupon his antagonist came forth again (yesterday) and gave evidence of fresh lies, also in respect of the Globe.d Besides this attack, however, there was also a DEFENCE put up by an Englishman e. Even if Herzen had not been in Siberia and was no Russian Silvio Pellico, his book was nevertheless amusing, an innocuous book: *'an honest man, look you, and soon dasht! He is a marvellous good neighbour in sooth; and a very good bowler; but, for Alisander, alas, you see, how 'tis.' *f Finally, the TUB-TUB PAPER, as is its wont, declared that the contest was becoming too personal, etc., was now over and closed its columns to it.g At all events this skirmish—even though the assailants were hardly brilliant—will do Herzen a great deal of harm in the eyes of the COCKNEYS.

Linah has informed me of some fresh details concerning the Cologne trial. The list of jurymen given in my pamphlet' quite

[^1]: a 'To the Editor of The Morning Advertiser' signed 'One who had been deceived', The Morning Advertiser, 29 November 1855. - b A. Herzen, 'My Exile in Siberia. To the Editor of The Morning Advertiser', The Morning Advertiser, 1 December 1855. - c A. Herzen, 'To the Editor of the Globe', The Globe and Traveller, 25 October 1855. - d 'Mr Herzen's Case' (letter signed 'deceived'), The Morning Advertiser, 6 December 1855. - e [E. Reeve,] 'To the Editor of The Morning Advertiser' signed 'Content and not deceived', ibid. - f Shakespeare, Love's Labour's Lost, V, 2. - g An Editors' Statement was published in The Morning Advertiser on 6 December 1855. - h Caroline Schöler - ' K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Com- munist Trial in Cologne.



