---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "291. Marx to Engels. 11 December "
Page_Range: "592-593"
---

# 291. Marx to Engels. 11 December 



**[p. 559]**

Burgers whiles away his time sending Mrs Daniels 'endless amounts of paper'. Also writes poetry. Exchanges not a word with his fellow-sufferer.

A London daily PENNY PAPER, The Telegraph, is said to have already dropped a number of HINTS about the underhand dealings of Dr Freund and his fellow-swindler, a military man.

The 2 articles received.674

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I almost forgot the most important point. A few weeks ago, 3 I THINK, Zitschke came to see my wife. The conversation turned to Mirbach.d QUOTH Zitschke: 'That old loafer had a splendid chance of a passage. I had thought him long since at sea. Then I found him sitting again at a table in Bibra's pothouse and looking very down-at-heel.' Liebknecht, too, claims to have seen him recently.

291

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 11 December 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Frederic,

[^1]: First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First time Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929

[^2]: IN MANCHESTER

[^3]: From Dana's letter, enclosed herewith, you will see that our manoeuvre has succeeded.675

[^4]: a young - b from F. Schiller, Die Bürgschaft - c It's enough to make you split your sides with laughter. - d See this volume, p. 560.



