---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "5. Jenny Marx to Adolf Cluss. 15 October 1852 "
Page_Range: "606-609"
---

# 5. Jenny Marx to Adolf Cluss. 15 October 1852 



**[p. 573]**

Many regards to Cluss also, and write soon telling us just how things are with you.

Lupus has just brought a brief scrawl on the latest events of the day in London.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934

5

JENNY MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS

IN WASHINGTON

London, 15 October 1852

Dear Mr Cluss,

Today my husband has appointed me his deputy and I therefore hasten to assume the duties of a secrétaire intime. For my husband is under such PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT AND WITHIN that he has had to traipse round all day on HOME BUSINESS and now, just gone 5, has not yet returned to dispose, more especially, of the affair Briiningk v. Cluss.a Do nothing, absolutely nothing about this matter until the next STEAMER. Imandt had meant to send a statement today proving that Willich and Kinkel had made insulting remarks about Mrs Briiningk. At the same time he will lay the blame for all the tittle-tattle at the door of that old buffoon, Ruge, presently knight-errant and champion of princely innocence, and will do so all the more easily as the rumour indeed arose and began to spread at the very moment when the old jackass declared Kinkel to be—witness his close friend Gross—an agent of the Prince of Prussia,b at the same time revealing that Kinkel's release had been

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 213. - b ibid., p. 92.

[^2]: 20—2736





**[p. 574]**



[^1]: a Arnold Ruge - b See this volume, pp. 145-46. - c Editorial Statement about A. Briiningk's letter in the Baltimore Wecker, 27 September 1852. See also this volume, p. 204.



Did anyone bother whether all this grieved me almost to death, when my child2 died, having imbibed at my breast torment, grief and care?—oh! and all the other sufferings—yet I was not called princess when I was born—but wherefore all this foolish commotion? We shall extricate ourselves somehow and prove the others responsible. But you must wait, at any rate, just one more posting-day.

The Brumaires have not yet arrived. My husband will send you by the next post the 2 People's Papers containing your articles.6

My brother Edgar has at last written to his mother/ Thanks to your kind efforts my letter reached him safely.d Once again, may I say how grateful I am.

One more thing. Keep Jacobus Huzel on a fairly short rein so that he doesn't kick over the traces.6 There should be no chit-chat with the vermin since their line now is to implicate us and thus erase the memory of their past infamies. Some diplomacy is required in dealing with this bunch of purely objective, principled, honourable, worthy washerwomen.

You have, I suppose, been following the Cologne trial in the Kölnische. Today we received an account of Becker'sf interroga- tion. Since there was nothing against him, it had been agreed to leave Becker out of the thing altogether,8 and this will explain to you the manner of his defence, which will be eagerly seized upon by the democrats in order to claim Becker as one of their own and declare him the true hero—free, independent man of the people that he is and no blind follower of a secret society's cut-and-dried doctrine—, precisely because he is the weakest of all and has the greatest amount of democratic blood in his veins. Should that loud-mouthed Heinzen make use of this case to build up Becker, you can at once point out that the defence had been agreed upon beforehand and that, shortly before his arrest, Becker had insistently begged my husband to attack with him in his review685

all the official democrats—Ruge, Heinzen, Kinkel, Willich, etc., etc.— and hold them up to ridicule. That he also wanted to have

[^1]: a Heinrich Guido - b [A. Cluss, Articles on Presidential Elections in the USA published in the section.] 'Our American Correspondence', The People's Paper, Nos. 23 and 24, 9 and 16 October 1852. - c Caroline von Westphalen - d See this volume, p. 71. - e A reference to J. Huzel's article 'Über die Flüchtlinge in London', Anzeiger des Westens, September 1852. - f Hermann Becker - s See this volume, pp. 212 and 242.

[^2]: 20*



