---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "6. Jenny Marx to Adolf Cluss. 30 October 1852 "
Page_Range: "609-612"
---

# 6. Jenny Marx to Adolf Cluss. 30 October 1852 

Farewell and warm regards,

Jenny Marx

Write again soon. Your letters invariably give us the greatest pleasure. My husband is always saying that if we had a few more chaps like Cluss, we might yet get something done. In the meantime, don't do too much. Best let dog eat dog, otherwise they might band together to combat the 'common enemy', the wicked, infamous blight—Marx and his clique.

First published abridged in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962

6

[London, 30 October 1852]

Dear Mr Cluss,

You will have been following the monster trial of the communists in the Kölnische Zeitung. During the sitting of 23 October the whole thing took such a splendid and interesting turn, and one so favourable to the accused, that we are beginning to regain some of our confidence.686 As you can imagine, the 'Marx party' is busy day and night and is having to throw itself into the work body and soul. This overloading with work also accounts for my again appearing before you as deputy reporter. Mr Willich's close friend, Mr Dietz, now also in America, has contrived to have all the documents, letters, minutes, etc., etc. of Willich's clique stolen from him. They were produced by the prosecution as evidence of the party's dangerous activities. In order to establish a

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: JENNY MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS ,2

[^2]: IN WASHINGTON

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 223-24.





[^1]: a outside society - b London in the original - c See this volume, pp. 225- 26. - d ibid., pp. 223-24.



The enclosed statement was issued today by Freiligrath, Marx, Engels and Wolff.3 We are sending it to the Tribune today. You could publish it as well.b

Excuse me for such a confused letter but I, too, have had some part in the intrigue and have done so much copying that my fingers are afire. Hence the muddle. Your essay in the Turn- Zeitungc has been much applauded here. My husband thought it first-rate and the style, in particular, exceptionally brilliant. There are others who prefer you in a less theoretical vein and would like you always to remain the same old humorous, light-hearted Cluss.

We have just received from Weerth and Engels whole parcels full of commercial addresses and pseudo-commercial letters so that we can send off the documents, letters, etc.d687

Another load of tremendous scandal has just arrived with the Kölnische. Two further packages are being dispatched at once to commercial addresses. A complete office has now been set up in our house. Two or three people are writing, others running errands, others scraping PENNIES together so that the writers may continue to exist and prove the old world of officialdom guilty of the most outrageous scandal. And in between whiles my 3 merry childrene sing and whistle, often to be harshly told off by their papa. What a bustle! Farewell, dear Mr Cluss, and write again soon to your friends.

By permission of the higher authorities,

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published considerably abridged in Printed according to the original Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 2, No. 31, Stuttgart,

[^2]: 1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Published m English m full for the Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, f l r s t t i m e

[^3]: Moscow, 1962

[^4]: 3 K. Marx and F. Engels, 'Public Statement to the Editors of the English Press'. - b The New-York Daily Tribune did not publish this statement. Its German translation was printed in the New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 37, 26 November 1852 and the Republik der Arbeiter, No. 49, 4 December 1852. - c A. Cluss, 'Die materielle Kritik und der moralisierende Standpunkt', Turn-Zeitung, No. 13, 1 October 1852. - d In the original there follows a copy made by Wilhelm Wolff of the statement mentioned above. - e Jenny, Laura and Edgar



