---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "8. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 27 April 1853 "
Page_Range: "614-615"
---

# 8. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 27 April 1853 



**[p. 581]**

Jenny Marx

First published in Voprosy istorii KPSS, Printed according to a letter from No. 3, Moscow, 1962 Cluss to Weydemeyer of 28 March

1853

Published in English for the first time

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 27 April 1853]

Dear Mr Engels,

It is for me a hateful task to have to write to you about money matters. You have already helped us all too often. But this time I have no other recourse, no other way out. I have written to Hagen in Bonn, to Georg Jung, to Cluss, to my mother-in-law,3 to my sisterb in Berlin. Ghastly letters! And so far not a word from a single one of them. So there's no other course left open to us. I cannot describe what things are like here. My husband has gone to the City to see Gerstenberg. You can imagine what kind of an errand that must be for him. Meanwhile I am writing these lines. Can you send us something? The baker warned us that there'd be no more bread after Friday. Yesterday when he asked: 'Is MR MARX AT HOME?' Musch managed to fend him off by answering: 'No, HE ANT UPSTAIRS' and then, with three loaves tucked under his arm, shot off like an arrow to tell his Moor about it.

Farewell.

Jenny Marx

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. I, Stutt- . . eart 1913 Published in English tor the first time

[^2]: a Henriette Marx - b probably Anna Elisabeth Franziska von Westphalen



