---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "9. Adolf Cluss to Joseph Weydemeyer. 15 May 1853 "
Page_Range: "615-616"
---

# 9. Adolf Cluss to Joseph Weydemeyer. 15 May 1853 



**[p. 582]**

ADOLF CLUSS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

Washington, May 15th 1853

 Marx has written me a very jolly letter in which he says that everyone was greatly amused by my description of the doings of Willich, that 'brother of the guild of misery'.693 He says that, amid peals of Homeric laughter, they resolved en grand comité3 to wish his 'life' as unhampered a course as possible. He remarks: 'If the lunacy of this drôleh were not intermixed and interlarded with cunning calculations as to how best to fill his belly without doing any work, he would long since have found his way to the lunatic asylum.' In return for my report, Marx is going to send me in his next a copy of the passage relating to Willich in The Great Men of the Exile.

Revolution and Counter-Revolution. Marx says he has no time for translation; if you or I or someone else will undertake to translate it, and if we let him know where he left off, he will take upon himself to write the whole of the conclusion.694 Marx is of the opinion that as a pamphlet, the thing will not sell, and certainly not pay for itself; he would be perfectly satisfied with a feuilleton. (So whatever remains to be done would be left to us.)

Raveaux's former followers—philistines—long in need of another saint, have put red Becker0 in Raveaux's place. A tout seigneur tout honneur0

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a in full committee - b rascal - c probably Max Joseph Becker - d Honour to whom honour is due.



