---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "10. Adolf Cluss to Joseph Weydemeyer. 2 June 1853 "
Page_Range: "616-617"
---

# 10. Adolf Cluss to Joseph Weydemeyer. 2 June 1853 



**[p. 10]**

ADOLF CLUSS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER695

IN NEW YORK

Washington, June 2nd 1853

 Today received a letter from Marx's wife which unfortunately I would seem to have placed outside my pocket when on the omnibus. Marx had just returned from Manchester (20th May).696

He is delighted with your Reform article3; likewise your introduc- tionb to Hirsch's statement.6 Marx's only regret is that not all our things are able to appear under your auspices, but that the names of the two ciphers from the Hornisse must be given precedence. Otherwise he is satisfied with the Reform. Dronke has at last obtained a post as clerk in Bradford at £10 a month.

Pieper would appear to have been shown the door by Rothschild6 some time ago; the part he played in the communist trial makes it difficult for him to find a berth elsewhere.

Rothschild, was at university with him, has paid him nothing to date, but would do so if he possibly could; Pieper must see to this au moment' having no other recourse.

Eccarius is still not restored. Lupus, due to PRESSURE FROM WITHOUT, is very ill disposed The Tribune leaders on the EASTERN QUESTION are all by Marx; he wrote them without adding any of the usual NEWS trivialities so that Dana went and changed some of the longer historical expositions, etc., into Tribunese and published them as LEADERS^ The Tribune is a well-spring from which Marx cannot afford to cut himself off, hence he intends to turn a blind eye and would rather we didn't make any direct reference to the fact, even though he resents it—, that his more objective LOOKING pieces appear without his name, while the articles that do appear under his own name are no more than dregs

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Worts, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, , , . , , . „ , . , r Moscow, 1962 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a J. Weydemeyer, 'Nationalökonomische Skizzen'. - b J. Weydemeyer, 'Der "de- mokratische" Mouchard". - c W. Hirsch, 'Erklärung' [of 12 January 1852], Belletris- tisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, No. 7, 29 April 1853. - d Gottlieb Kellner and Heinrich Heise - e probably Wilhelm Karl Rothschild - f presently - 8 On the Tribune editors' tampering with Marx's and Engels' articles see also this volume, pp. 331-32.



