---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "12. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 9 September 1853 "
Page_Range: "617-619"
---

# 12. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 9 September 1853 



**[p. 11]**

ADOLF CLUSS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER697

IN NEW YORK

Washington, June 14th 1853

Dear Weyd.,

Just received your letter. As regards Pieper's article, Marx wrote some time ago—4 months, perhaps—in reply to my apology for making use of one of his letters, saying that I shouldn't get such silly ideas into my head.698 Though in no way given to flattery he had found that I only made use of his letters on rare occasions and certainly never for my own personal ends; in any case, they were deliberately written for me to make use of. I shouldn't think him so niggardly of his ideas; Pieper and red Wolffa are there, writing down everything he says

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Work, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

12

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

[London, 9 September 1853]

Dear Mr Engels,

Imandt was here just now and told us that Dronke was studying Spanish and he believed he had seen him with the little grammar, 'the one that was sold'.b If, dear Mr Engels, you could question

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a Ferdinand Wolff - b C. Franceson, Grammatik der spanischen Sprache. See this volume, p. 364.



QUESTION.

Today Karl has been forcing himself to write another long article on economies'1 and, being very tired, has asked me this evening to take up the pen on his behalf.

Farewell, and warmest regards from us all.

Jenny Marx

Lupus, or so we hear, is leaving tomorrow morning. He has not said good-bye to me and the children.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 , r. Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Wilhelm Wolff (a pun: Isegrim—a wolf, character in Goethe's 'Reineke Fuchs'). - b See this volume, pp. 579-80. - c ibid., p. 365. - d K. Marx, 'The Vien- na Note.—The United States and Europe.— Letters from Shumla.—Peel's Bank Act'.



