---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "14. Adolf Cluss to Joseph Weydemeyer. 12 December 1853 "
Page_Range: "619-621"
---

# 14. Adolf Cluss to Joseph Weydemeyer. 12 December 1853 



**[p. 13]**

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 24 November 1853]

Dear Mr Engels,

I have made out the POSTAL ORDER to William Wolff, with Charles Marx as the sender."

The statements attacking Willich's scrawlb will hardly catch tomorrow's steamer since Miskowsky, 'the missing Russian officer', has not as yet been traced. He lives somewhere in Whitechapel and his address has been mislaid. Nor was it known to Kossuth, whom we approached indirectly. A messenger has just left for Whitechapel. Unluckily for the gallant Willich, the man has been back here for some months, possesses a certificate signed by Kossuth to the effect that he fought in the Hungarian campaign, and will now be able to provide a first-hand account of the duel. 00

Père is BUSY with the next instalment of the Palmerston articled and hopes to receive some small aid tomorrow.

With warmest regards.

Jenny Marx

Published in English for the first time 14 ADOLF CLUSS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

Washington, December 12th 1853

Dear W.,

Herewith 1 article 'from Wisconsin"1; I think you'd be well advised to bring it out in two parts, with 'to be continued' in between.

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929

[^2]: IN NEW YORK

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 398 - b A. Willich, 'Doctor Karl Marx und seine "Enthül- lungen"'. - c 'Lord Palmerston', IV published in the New-York Daily Tribune under the title 'England and Russia'. - d 'Der Staat Wiskonsin' by Cluss was published in Die Reform, No. 109, 15 December 1853.



Marx has answered Willich at length,*3 in very learned, 'Hegelian' fashion. Splendid, so far as I can see, and plentifully buttressed with documents; I shall probably send you the thing tomorrow, but haven't yet had time to read it through, and so do not know what to do with it. It is voluminous. 20 pages of LARGE NOTE-PAPER. Marx had already written it when my letter arrived informing him that we were taking care of the answer/ He now considers that, since it isn't every day one meets with such a lying codger as Willich, it would be RATHER DISAGREEABLE if the thing had to be shelved. He authorises me to make deletions if his article repeats what we have already said, or conflicts with ours in matters of detail.

More about this when I send you the thing. The accompanying letter, dashed off in great haste, partly by Monsieur and partly by Madame Marx,701 concludes as follows:

'Yesterday evening (27TH Nov.) the Waschlapskis and Schelmufs- kisd held a meeting.702 Harney was IN THE CHAIR. The PEOPLE almost tore him to pieces. DOWN, DOWN, RASCAL, TRAITOR, RENEGADE, and he wasn't permitted to TAKE THE CHAIR. PEOPLE jumped onto the platform, everyone was belabouring everyone else, the Schelmufs- kis acted as Harney's GUARDS.'

Again: 'As regards the Reform, Karl has done everything in his power. Pieper, driven by necessity, has gone to work in a French SHOP, where he sells sunshine, i.e. the newly-invented lampe réverbère!" He cannot write just now. Accordingly Karl has roped in Heise and given him a subscription to the reading room since he hadn't got the required penny. He has also written to Germany asking for help.'

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 399 and 400-01. - b K. Marx, 'The Knight of the Noble Consciousness'. - c J. Weydemeyer, A. Cluss, A. Jacobi, 'An die Redaktion der New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung', see also this volume, p. 402. - d An allusion to petty-bourgeois refugees, using names of characters in Heine's satirical poem 'Zwei Ritter'. See also this volume, p. 401. - e lamps with reflectors



