---
Volume: 39
Document_Title: "17. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 23 May 1854 "
Page_Range: "622-626"
---

# 17. Jenny Marx to Frederick Engels. 23 May 1854 



**[p. 589]**

so that we don't miss another whole week, as we did last. Otherwise it would make too big a hole in the money-box. Cordial regards from the whole family and from

Jenny Marx

Heise and the little man b have written Imandt a quite crazy letter. It reeked of brandy.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time

17

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

[London, 23 May 1854] 3 o'clock in the afternoon

Dear Mr Engels,

Your article0 has just arrived. It's already been addressed and I shall put it in the post at the same time as this note. Karl was tremendously pleased when he heard the postman's portentous double KNOCK. Voilà Frederik,d £2, we're saved! he cried. Unfortu- nately he is still very, very unwell and asks me to tell you that he is

[^1]: IN MANCHESTER

[^2]: a 16 May. Engels wrote 'A famous Victory' on 15 May. - b Ernst Dronke -

[^3]: c F. Engels, 'The War'. - d That's Frederic.





**[p. 590]**

I enclose herewith the latest dispatch from Cluss and would ask you to return his letter6 and not tell Heise anything about it. The fellow chatters so and, should little Meyen or other eminent men hear anything prematurely, communications to Cluss would at once stop. It's all very amusing and the gentlemen should be allowed to carry on undisturbed.

In his last letter to Imandt, consisting of a whole lot of little snippings glued together, Heise said he had now again given up the military DODGE since the Russians waged war differently from the way the Tribune said; he intended to apply himself hencefor- ward to doux commerced

Karl and I send our heartiest thanks for the articles, and the three little onesd send their love.

Yours

Jenny Marx

Our Edgare is said to be loafing about in New York again and to be coming here and then going on to Germany! What a band of loafers!

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a 26 May. Engels wrote 'The Present Condition of the English Army—Tactics, Uniform, Commissariat, etc' on 25 May. - b Probably Cluss' letter to Marx of 30 April 1854. - c gentle commerce - d Jenny, Laura and Edgar - e Edgar von Westphalen



NOTES

AND INDEXES



