---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "5. F. Engels. Violation of the Prussian Constitution "
Page_Range: "81-83"
---

# 5. F. Engels. Violation of the Prussian Constitution 

Frederick Engels

VIOLATION OF THE PRUSSIAN CONSTITUTION 4 1

There exists a law in Prussia, dated 17th of January3 1820, forbidding the King to contract any State Debts without the sanction of the States-General, an assembly which it is very well known, does not yet exist in Prussia.^ This law is the only guarantee the Prussians have for ever getting the constitution which, since 1815, has been promised to them. The fact of the existence of such a law not being generally known out of Prussia, the government succeeded in 1823 in borrowing three millions of pounds in England — first violation. After the French revolution of 1830, the Prussian government being obliged to make extensive preparations for a war which was then likely to break out, they not having any money, made the "interests for transatlantic trade",43 a government concern, borrow twelve millions of dollars (£1,700,000), which, of course, were under the guarantee of the government, and spent by the government — sec- ond violation. Not to speak of the small violations, such as loans of a few hundred thousands of pounds by the same concern, the King of Prussia0 has, at this moment, committed a third great violation. The credit of this concern being as it seems exhausted, the Bank of Prussia, being just in the same way, exclusively a government concern, has been empowered by the King to issue banknotes to the amount of ten millions of dollars (£1,350,000). This, deducting 37s millions as deposit and 2/3 million for the increased expenses of the establishment, amounts in reality to an "indirect loan" of six millions of dollars or nearly one million of pounds, which the government will be responsible for, as up to this time no private capitalists are

[^1]: The Northern Star mistakenly gives 22nd of June.— Ed. b Frederick William IV.—Ed.





**[p. 53]**

Written in May 1846 Reprinted from the newspaper

First published in The Northern Star No. 446, May 30, 1846 with an editorial note: "From Our German Correspondent"

