---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "11. K. Marx. Declaration Against Karl Grün "
Page_Range: "101-104"
---

# 11. K. Marx. Declaration Against Karl Grün 

Pi( 3a*rttiaa»irt«rtn •*» lar M »aaai Am 9ttä|dli « Cfntiaua. - ft* ««A*!»«, »ft ,u m.hrfrhnto lapi,», Aa Ma attaa Mri Ifoaitalw Ibit 3m Ca N an toaanara.. MM Mr ««»»lrat-.ita.e Mi L«, m Mai *«^tif*ra Jtrrr. > latwrrpra hi «U» x»r ailrt, Cura Matiuat ,. u, t, ,„ 3a aaa| rjiaatinre Mi atfan nclfaarrit R. - 3a «tfatlara aa» Kl Cffrialru* k.n llrraalfr, t*#J»#ift, t K 3a«i»'«atf Mi MTB«4t Ma»[aa»<l>a)Tbal.-i Sta Jt.- 3attat Ti» Mi4>rrra«»aal(r, tcff.Gaaa KL 3a««tttrtjai Mi tjatttri'.-aiu Vdaram M|aa|0ilaifa ar Mara lataataara H gi Urtaajaaaa.

Karl Marx

[DECLARATION AGAINST KARL GRÜN]

Under the date-line Berlin, March 20, the Trier'sche Zeitung prints an article on my pamphlet now in printing, Contradictions dans le système des contradictions économiques de M. Proudhon ou les misères de la philosophie.3 The Berlin correspondent15 makes me out to be the author of a report printed in the Rhein- u. Mosel-Zeitung and else- where concerning this pamphlet, Proudhon's book0 and the activities of its translator, Herr Grün.56 He hails me time and again as "editor of the former Rheinische Zeitung" quite in the style of the Brussels or another correspondent. "Buttressed by a knowledge of the current state of the press in Germany", our friend peddles his insinuation. Not merely his insinuation, but his whole literary existence may, as far as I am concerned, be "buttressed by a knowledge of the current state of the press in Germany". I grant him the most practically proven "knowledge of the current state of the press in Germany". But this time it has not "buttressed" him.

The alleged Berlin correspondent need only read through my criticism of Proudhon in the Critical Criticismd in order to realise that the report which arouses his enmity might well originate in Brussels, but could not possibly originate with me, if only because it "sets the same value" on Proudhon and H[er]r Grün.

[^1]: a The title of the work was changed later (see pp. 105-212 of this volume).—Ed. b Obviously Eduard Meyen.—Ed. c P. J. Proudhon, Systeme des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère, T. I I I , Paris, 1846.—Ed.

[^2]: d K. Marx and F. Engels, The Holy Family or Critique of Critical Criticism (see present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 23-54).—Ed.





**[p. 73]**

"Concerning further the translator of P[roudhon]'s work on economics", our friend in Berlin need only add to the record that " We here in Berlin have learnt much and of great diversity" from Herr Grün's Soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien [Social Movement in France and Belgium] in order to place the value of this book above all doubt. And one must consider what it means when "We here in Berlin" "learn" anything at all, and in this case even "much and of great diversity", quantitatively and qualitatively at the same time! We here in Berlin!

Identifying me with the Brussels or another correspondent, the Berlin or alleged Berlin correspondent exclaims:

Grün "has probably to make amends for the misfortune of having acquainted the German world with the results of foreign socialism before Herr Dr. Marx, 'editor of the former Rheinische Zeitung'".

Our friend undeniably betrays great ingenuity in forming his conjectures! I should like to confide to him, sub rosa,3 that, admittedly in my own view, Herr Grün's Soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien and the French and the Belgian social movement — individual names and data excepted — have nothing in common with each other. At the" same time, however, I must confide to him that I have experienced so little urge to acquaint "the German world" with the results of my studies of Herr Grün's Soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien that I have permitted a fairly comprehensive review of Grün's book, prepared a year ago, peace- fully to sleep the sleep of the just in manuscript form, and only now that I have been challenged by our friend in Berlin shall I send it to the Westphälisches Dampfboot to be printed. The review forms an appendix to the book written jointly by Fr. Engels and me on "the German ideology" (critique of modern German philosophy as expounded by its representatives Feuerbach, B[runo] Bauer and Stirner, and of German socialism as expounded by its various prophets).b The circumstances which have hindered the printing of this manuscript and still hinder it will perhaps be set forth for the reader elsewhere as a contribution to the description of the "current state of the press in Germany". Nothing hindered the separate printing of my review of Grün's book, which in no way offends

[^1]: a In secret.— Ed. b See present edition, Vol. 5.— Ed.





**[p. 74]**

A word more concerning "my conceit in imagining that I have scaled the topmost rung of human wisdom".

Who else could have inoculated me with this disease but Herr Grün who found in my expositions in the Deutsch-Französische Jahr- bücher1' the solution to the ultimate riddle (see, for example, the foreword to his Bausteine) in the same way as he finds it now in Proudhon's economics; who, as he now extols in Proudhon the true point of view, likewise assured his readers about me (see Grün's Neue Anekdota), that I had "negated the constitutional and radical point of view".5« Herr Grün first poisons me, in order then to be able to blame me for the fact that his poison worked! Let our Berlin friend calm himself, however—I enjoy perfect health.

Brussels, April 3, 1847 Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Printed according to the Trier'sche Zeitung No. 28, April 8, 1847 Zeitung text checked with the and in the Trier'sche Zeitung No. 99, Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung April 9, 1847 „ , , . , , . „ , . , , , .. Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a The words "the insipid and tasteless" are missing in the Trier'sche Zeitung.— Ed. The reference is to K. Marx's articles "On the Jewish Question" and "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law" (see present edition, Vol. 3).—Ed.



