---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "27. F. Engels. The Agrarian Programme of t h e Chartists "
Page_Range: "387-390"
---

# 27. F. Engels. The Agrarian Programme of t h e Chartists 

Frederick Engels

[THE AGRARIAN PROGRAMME OF THE CHARTISTS]161

About two years ago the Chartist workers founded an association with the object of buying land and dividing it among its members into small holdings.162 It was hoped in this way to diminish the excessive competition between factory workers themselves, by keeping from the labour market some of these workers to form a quite new and essentially democratic class of small peasants. This project, whose author is none other than Feargus O'Connor himself, has had such success that the Chartist Land Company already num- bers from two to three hundred thousand members,3 that it disposes of social funds of £60,000 (a million and a half francs), and that its receipts, announced in The Northern Star, exceed £2,500 per week. In fact, the Company, of which I propose to give you later a more detailed account, has grown to such a size that it is already disquieting the landed aristocracy; for it is evident that this movement, if it continues to grow at the same rate as up to now, will end by becoming transformed into a national agitation for taking possession of the nation's land by the people. The bourgeoisie does not find this Company to its taste either; it sees it as a lever in the hands of the people which will allow the latter to free themselves without needing the help of the middle class. It is particularly the small bourgeoisie, more or less liberal, which looks askance at the Land Company because it already finds the Chartists much more independent of its support than before the founding of the association. Moreover, these same radicals, unable to explain the

[^1]: a The Northern Star No. 524, November 6, 1847 has "consists of a vast number of members" instead of "already numbers from two to three hundred thousand members".—Ed.





**[p. 359]**



[^1]: a F. O'Connor, "To the Members of the National Land Company" and "O'Connor, F., Esq. (Treasurer) in Account with the National Land Company".—Ed.

[^2]: b F. O'Connor, "To the Editors of the Nottingham Mercury, the Nonconformist, the Dispatch, the Globe, the Manchester Examiner and Lloyds' Trash".—Ed.





**[p. 360]**

When the meetings had ended, O'Connor declared that he would receive the contributions and subscriptions of the members of the Land Company, and the sum paid to him that evening exceeded

il,000 (25,000 francs).

At Nottingham, where O'Connor on the next day drew one of the greatest meetings which had ever taken place there, the same popular enthusiasm was caused by his speech.

This was at least the hundredth time that Mr. O'Connor has triumphed in this brilliant way over the calumnies of the bourgeois press. Imperturbable amidst all these attacks, the indefatigable patriot continues his work, and the unanimous confidence of the English people is the best proof of his courage, his energy, his incorru ptibility.

[^1]: Written on October 30, 1847 Printed according to the text in La Réforme First published in La Réforme, November 1, 1847 and Translated from the French The Northern Star No. 524, November 6, 1847



