---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "36. F. Engels. Reform Banquet at Lille."
Page_Range: "422-426"
---

# 36. F. Engels. Reform Banquet at Lille.

Frederick Engels

REFORM BANQUET AT LILLE.— SPEECH OF M. LEDRU-ROLLIN

In response to the toast:—"To the labourers,—to their imprescrip- tible rights,—to their sacred interests, hitherto unknown."2

"Citizens,—Yes, to the labourers! to their imprescriptible rights,—to their sacred interests, hitherto unknown. To the unalienable rights of man, proclaimed in principle, by two glorious revolutions ; but artfully eluded in their application, and successfully re-wrested from the people, and which are now only a glorious, yet bitter remembrance! Political rights to the people, it is said, is madness. How entrust them with them, in their state of incapacity, of ignorance, of moral depravity? To give the people political freedom is a blind and dangerous power; it is revolution—blood —anarchy—chaos! Gentlemen, you know the people; you in this industrial city, at once so wealthy and so poor, believe you this picture to be true! Oh! doubtless, if we cast our eyes over the pages of certain romance w riters, to whom the grand side of things has appeared trivial, vulgar—who have sought for effect in the humorous, the fantastic, the exceptional, the people—-is it thus! Taking the normal life of our towns, from one point, where criminals escaped from justice, find a refuge, the way of life, the dregs of society, they have said, 'Such are the people!' Doubtless such would still be the people, did we put faith in those mercenary writers, who, to terrify the wealthy, cry out against the invasion of the barbarians! Barbarians! they have cast that epithet upon the people, as the most outrageous of insults. Ah! if barbarians always signify men full of simplicity, of strength, of social and youthful energy, those barbarians can alone save our worn-out official world, fast hastening to decay in powerlessness and corruption. No; a thousand times no, it is not the people. It is not upon the theatre of crime and debauchery, that it must be sought for. To be acquainted with it, we must transport ourselves into those manufacturing towns, where the merchant, struggling against unrestricted competition which crushes him, between the tyrannical pressure

[^1]: a Ledru-Rollin's speech at the banquet at Lille on November 7, 1847 was translated by Engels according to the report in La Réforme, November 10, 1847.—Ed.

[^2]: The reference is evidently to the revolutions of 1789-94 and 1830.— Ed.





**[p. 394]**







**[p. 396]**

Compiled and translated into English Reprinted from the newspaper in the first half of December 1847

First published in The Northern Star No. 530, December 18, 1847 with editorial note: "From Our Paris Correspondent"

