---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "40. F. Engels. The Réforme and the National "
Page_Range: "435-438"
---

# 40. F. Engels. The Réforme and the National 

Frederick Engels

THE RÉFORME AND THE NATIONAL™

Following the Lille banquet a controversy developed between the Réforme and the National, which has now led to a decisive split between the two papers.

The facts are as follows: From the inception of the reform banquets the National has attached itself even more openly than before to the dynastic opposition.214 At the Lille banquet M. Degeorge of the National withdrew together with Odilon Barrot. The National expressed its opinion of the Lille banquet in terms that were more than equivocal. Challenged by the Réforme to explain itself in more detail, it refused, with the excuse that it did not wish to start polemics with this newspaper. This was no reason at all for failing to comment on facts. To be brief, the Réforme did not let the matter drop and eventually attacked M. Garnier-Pagès of the National for a speech in which he denied the existence of classes and deleted the bourgeoisie and the proletariat in the general phrase of citoyens français. Now, at last, the National declared that it would defend its friends against a newspaper which cast suspicion on all worthy patriots, such as Carnot, Garnier-Pagès, etc.

The National, very soon defeated on every point, could finally hit upon no other expedient than to accuse the Réforme of communism.

[^1]: "You speak of indefinite strivings, of theories and systems which arise among the people, you censure us for openly attacking these—to put it bluntly—communistic strivings. Very well then, declare yourselves directly, either for or against communism. We declare for all to hear that we have nothing in common with the Communists, with these people who deny property, family and country. When the day of battle comes we shall fight not with, but against these abominable strivings. We have no peace, no tolerance for these odious fantasies, for this absurd and barbarous (sauvage) system





**[p. 407]**

To such grounds against communism the National adds its plans for improving the condition of the workers—postal reform, financial reform, luxury taxes, state subsidies, the abolition of the octrois,215

and free competition.

Correcting the ridiculous ideas of communism held by the National is not worth the effort. It is ludicrous, however, that the National is still parading the terrifying fantasy of a constantly threatening invasion by the "Great Powers", and that it still believes that beyond the Rhine and across the Channel there are millions of bayonets pointed against France, and hundreds of thousands of cannons aimed at Paris. The Réforme has quite correctly replied to this that in the event of an invasion by the Kings it will not be the fortifications which will serve as a rampart, but the peoples themselves.

With reference to the article from the National quoted above the Réforme declares:

We thank the Réforme for the energetic way in which it has stood for true democracy as against the National. We thank the Réforme for defending communism against it. We willingly acknowledge that the

Réforme has always defended the Communists whenever they have been persecuted by the government. Alone of all the Paris newspapers, the Réforme defended the materialistic Communists when they were dragged to court by M. Delangle216; on this same occasion M. Cabet almost conceded that the government was right as against the materialists. We are glad that the Réforme, even in the more or less undeveloped forms in which communism has so far appeared, has discovered a kernel of truth to which it stands closer

[^1]: "We are not communistic, and our reason is that communism disregards the laws of production, that it is not concerned with ensuring that enough is produced for the whole of society. But the economic proposals of the Communists stand closer to us than those of the National, which accepts the existing bourgeois economics without further ado. We shall defend the Communists against the police and the National also in the future, because we acknowledge at least their right of discussion, and because the doctrines that originate from the workers themselves always deserve considera- tion."

[^2]: a Quoted from the leading article in La Réforme, December 21, 1847; the reply of this newspaper given below is from the same source.— Ed.





**[p. 408]**

In its repudiation of the National, furthermore, the Réforme h only pronouncing the same judgment that the democratic movement in Germany, England and Belgium, indeed everywhere except in France, has long since passed on it.

Written at the end of December 1847 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 104, December 30, 1847 time

