---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "III. M'Culloch "
Page_Range: "445-448"
---

# III. M'Culloch 



**[p. 416]**

(This example on the passing from one trade to another to be used in respect of the debate on free trade.222)

2. Something to be said on population theory. 3. Influence of changed and expanded division of labour on the fixing of wages.

II. CARLYLEC

1. Not only the quantity of wages3 is to be considered. They vary in quality, depending on the play of circumstances.

2. The advantage of wages: that from now on necessity, interest, haggling, alone link the worker to the employer. No longer anything patriarchal, as in the Middle Ages.

4. The entire theory of Malthus and the economists amounts to saying that it lies with the workers to reduce the demand by not making any children.

[^1]: Poor laws, extirpation of vermin, chargeable labourers.223

[^2]: 3. The greater part of labour is not skilled labour.3

[^3]: III. M'CULLOCHd

[^4]: "The wages earned by the labourer are. only the common and ordinary rate of profit to the proprietors of the machine called man, thereto [dazu]e a sum to replace the wear and tear of the machines, or, which is the same thing, to supply the place of the old and decayed labourers with new ones" fp. 319J.f

[^5]: 3 Marx uses the English word.— Ed. b Bowring's speech is quoted in W. Atkinson, Principles of Political Economy, pp. 36-38.— Ed.

[^6]: c Th. Carlyle, Chartism.— Ed. d J. R. M'Culloch, The Principles of Political Economy.— Ed. e M'Culloch has here: "exclusive of".—Ed. The words "to replace of the machines" and "new ones" are in English in the original.— Ed.



^^T£LZJ^

u ^Pu SL'^ ^ Ä ^ v ^57*.*^?

^ L V *»• ^ >• - • - s** T _ , x ^

[^1]: First page of Marx's manuscript "Wages"





