---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "VI. Andrew Ure , "
Page_Range: "449-450"
---

# VI. Andrew Ure , 



**[p. 420]**

One has suggested to the workers:

1) savings banks; 2) to learn all possible trades (so that when there is a surplus of workers in one industry the same occurs at once in all industries).

8. In times of stagnation: a) cessation of work; b) reduction of wages; c) the same wage, but employment for fewer days in the week.225

9. Concerning the combinations of trade,3 it is to be remarked:

1. The expenses of the workers (the costs). Invention of machines in consequence of the combinations. Other division of labour. Depression of wages. Deplacementb of factories to other localities.

2. If they were all to succeed in keeping wages so high that profits were significantly reduced below the average profits of other countries, or so that capital would grow more slowly, the industry of a country would be ruined, and the workers together with the masters even more so.

Although a reduction in taxes does not benefit the workers, a rise in taxation, on the other hand, harms them. The good thing in the rise in taxation in countries with a developed bourgeoisie is that the estate of small farmers and proprietors (craftsmen, etc.) is thereby ruined and thrown into the working class.

Influence of the Irish in England, the Germans in Alsace, on wages.

General principle of modern industry: to replace adults by children, skilled workers by unskilled, men by women.

Equalisation of wages: Main feature of modern industry [see pp. 34, 35].

[^1]: V. CABBAGE'

[^2]: Truck system.?26

[^3]: VI. ANDREW UREd

[^4]: a The words "combinations of trade" are in English in the original.— Ed. b The word "déplacement" is in English in the original.— Ed. c Ch. Babbage, Traité sur l'économie des machines et des manufactures.— Ed. d A. Ure, Philosophie des manufactures, ou Economie industrielle.— Ed.



