---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "[ lX]. Bray. Savings Banks "
Page_Range: "450-451"
---

# [ lX]. Bray. Savings Banks 



**[p. 421]**

Mr. Rossi thinks: The manufacturer only advances to the worker his share in the product because the latter cannot wait for its sale. This is a speculation which has no direct bearing on the production process. If the worker can maintain himself until the product is sold he will, as an associé, claim his share in it afterwards.

Hence, wages are not a constituent element of the product as are capital and the land. They are a mere accident, a form of our social condition. Wages do not belong to capital.

Wages are not a factor indispensable to production. In a different organisation of labour they may disappear [see pp. 369, 370].

[VIIL] CHERBULIEZb

1. "The increase of the productive capital does not necessarily entail an increase of the approvisionnement for the workers. Raw materials and machinery can be increased while approvisionnement is reduced.

"The price of labour depends on a) the absolute quantity of the productive capital; b) on the proportions of the various elements of capital, two social facts on which the will of the workers cannot exert any influence.

2. "It is not so much the absolute consumption of the worker as his relative consumption which makes his position either happy or unhappy. Beyond the necessary consumption the value of what we enjoy is essentially relative" [pp. 103-04, 105, 109].

When one speaks of the fall or rise of wages one must never lose sight of the whole world market or of the position of the workers in the various countries.

Egalitarian and other attempts to fix wages justly.

The minimum wage itself changes and constantly falls. Example of spirits.

Triple machine in the hands of despotism and capital. 1. The money flows back into the national bank, which makes profits by lending it back to the capitalists.

[^1]: ("IX.] BRAYC

[^2]: SAVINGS BANKS

[^3]: a P. Rossi, Cours d'économie politique.—Ed. b A. Cherbuliez, Riche ou pauvre.— Ed. c J. F. Bray, Labour's Wrong and Labour's Remedy.— Ed.



