---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "IV. Fluctuations of Wages "
Page_Range: "453-454"
---

# IV. Fluctuations of Wages 



**[p. 424]**

g) Factory regime. Housing legislation. Truck system,3 where the employer cheats the worker by raising the price of goods while leaving the nominal wage the same.

III. COMPETITION AMONG THE WORKERS THEMSELVES

a) By a general economic law there cannot be two market prices. The wages of 1,000 workers of the same skill are determined not by the 950 in employment but by the 50 unemployed. Influence of the Irish on the position of the English workers and of the Germans on the position of the Alsatian workers.

b) The workers compete with each other not merely by one offering himself more cheaply than another, but by one doing the work of two.

Advantages of the unmarried over the married worker, etc. Competition between workers from villages and towns.

IV. FLUCTUATIONS OF WAGES

They are occasioned by:

1) Changes in fashions. 2) The changing seasons. 3) Fluctuations in trade. In case of a crisis a) the workers will limit their spending, or, to increase their productivity, they will either work longer hours or produce more in the same hour. But since their wages have been reduced because the demand for their product has slackened, they increase the unfa- vourable proportion of the supply to the demand, and then the bourgeois says: if the people would only work. Their wages drop still lower through their overexertion.

ß) In times of crisis: Complete unemployment. Reduction in wages. No change in wages and reduction of the working days.228

Y) In all crises the following circular movement relates to the workers:

The employer cannot employ the workers because he cannot sell his product. He cannot sell his product because he has nö buyers. He has no buyers because the workers have nothing to offer in exchange

[^1]: a Marx uses the English term.—Ed.



