---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "2. Conservative, or Bourgeois, Socialism "
Page_Range: "542-543"
---

# 2. Conservative, or Bourgeois, Socialism 



**[p. 513]**

2. CONSERVATIVE, OR BOURGEOIS, SOCIALISM

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social grievances, in order to secure the continued existence of bourgeois society.

To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, improvers of the condition of the working class, organisers of charity, members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of every imaginable kind. This form of Socialism has, moreover, been worked out into complete systems.

We may cite Proudhon's Philosophie de la Misère as an example of this form.

The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social conditions3 without the struggles and dangers necessarily resulting therefrom. They desire the existing state of society minus its revolutionary and disintegrating elements. They wish for a bourgeoisie without a proletariat. The bourgeoisie naturally con- ceives the world in which it is supreme to be the best; and bourgeois Socialism develops this comfortable conception into various more or less complete systems.5 In requiring the proletariat to carry out such a system, and thereby to march straightway into the social0 New Jerusalem, it but requires in reality, that the proletariat should remain within the bounds of existing society, but should cast away all its hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

A second and more practical, but less systematic, form of this Socialism sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in the eyes of the working class, by showing that no mere political reform, but only a change in the material conditions of existence, in

[^1]: * The revolutionary storm of 1848 swept away this whole shabby tendency and < ured its protagonists of the desire to dabble further in Socialism. The chief i epresentative and classical type of this tendency is Herr Karl Grün. [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.]

[^2]: a The German editions have: "want the living conditions of modern society".—Ed. b The German editions have here: "a more or less complete system".—Ed. c This word was added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed.



