---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "58. F. Engels. A Word to the Riforma "
Page_Range: "582-585"
---

# 58. F. Engels. A Word to the Riforma 

Frederick Engels

A WORD TO THE RIFORMA

The Riforma of Lucca has printed a reply to one of those well-known and vile articles which the Augsburger Zeitung* is accustomed to publish on instructions from the Imperial Chancellery in Vienna.311

That trashy rag from the Lechb had not only praised to the skies the loyalty of the 518,000 Austrian soldiers to their feeble-minded Ferdinand, but had also claimed that all these soldiers, Bohemians, Poles, Slovaks, Croats, Heyducks, Wallachians, Hungarians, Italians, etc., were burning with enthusiasm for German unity and would willingly part with their lives for it, as soon as it should be the will of the Emperorl

As though this were not precisely the misfortune—that so long as Austria exists Germany has to risk seeing its unity defended by Heyducks, Croats and Wallachians, as though the unity of Germany so long as Austria survives could be anything else but the unity of Germany with Croats, Wallachians, Magyars and Italians!

The Riforma replies very aptly to the lying claim of the All-Gemeinec

that Austria is in fact defending the interests of the German nation in Lombardy, and concludes with an appeal to the Germans, drawing a parallel between the Italian movement of 1848 and the German wars of liberation in 1813 and 1815.

The Riforma evidently thought that by doing so it was paying a compliment to the Germans, otherwise it would never have equated,

[^1]: a Allgemeine Zeitung (Augsburg).—Ed.

[^2]: Augsburg is situated on the Lech.—Ed. c A pun on the name: Allgemeine Zeitung—"All-Gemeine" means thoroughly vile.— Ed.





**[p. 554]**

The Riforma may take our word for it: Germany is fully enlightened as to the wars of liberation, both through the consequences of the wars themselves and through the ignominious end to which the heroes of that "glorious" age have come. Only the hired papers of the government still puff their cheeks and trumpet forth praise for that stupidity-intoxicated period, the public laughs and even the iron cross turns red with shame.

Precisely these newspapers, precisely these enthusiastic French- eaters of 1813, are now raising the same outcry against the Italians as they did before against the French, who sing paeons of praise to Austria, to Christian-Germanic Austria, and who preach crusades against Romance knavery and Romance frippery—for indeed Italians are just as much Romance as the French.

Would the Italians like an example of the sympathy they may expect from the worthy blusterers of the age of liberation, of the kind of ideas these red-headed visionaries entertain about the Italian nation? We shall merely quote the well-known song by A[ugust] A[dolf] Lfudwig] Folien3:

and how these poetic ravings of an ever cool-headed philistine drivel on. Then come the most ludicrous pictures of bandits, daggers, fire-belching mountains, Romance knavery, the infidelity of Italian women, bugs, scorpions, poison, vipers, assassins, etc., seen by this virtuous lover of plums running around in dozens on all the highways of Italy, and finally the gushing philistine thanks his God that he is in the land of Love and Friendship, of shindies with chair-legs, of faithful, blue-eyed pastors' daughters, of probity and cosiness, in short in the land of German Loyalty. Such are the superstitious and novelettish ideas entertained by the heroes of 1813 about Italy, which of course they have never seen.

[^1]: Yon land of marvels all may sing, Where mandolines and soft guitars do ring

[^2]: And, 'neath darkling leaf, the golden orange gleams; But I the purple German plum esteem And Borsdorf's apple on its leafy beam,

[^3]: a August Folien composed the music and Johann Friedrichsen wrote the words.—Ed.



Written about February 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 16, February 24, 1848 time

Signed: F. Engels

