---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "1. K. Marx. Protectionists"
Page_Range: "602-603"
---

# 1. K. Marx. Protectionists

Karl Marx

PROTECTIONISTS324

1) have never protected small industry, only machine industry. Example: the school of List in Germany. Gulich.3

2) If we believe what the protectionists say, they merely preserve the status quo. Protection will never effect sales of the protected product on foreign markets. Hence reactionary.15

3) The last consolation of the protectionists is that the country is not exploited by foreign but by domestic capitalists.

4) It is said, indeed, that internal reforms must first be made before one can think of free trade.c The power to reform the position of the classes is not ascribed to the protective system itself. But they say it would be foolish to reform international relations before domestic relations have been reformed. But what is the protective system? It is proof that the class which carries it into effect has power in its hands. Therefore, given the protective system [] the capitalists will not concede anything. Moreover, gentlemen, great social and historical reforms are never made by concessions, by the generosity of the ruling classes, but only through the nécessité des choses. They must therefore be forced through. It is therefore ridiculous to believe that in a country where the protective system prevails [] [] [] the relations between capital and labour are reformed in any way. I shall say no more of the protectionists [] of the question/

[^1]: Written about September 18, 1847 Printed according to the manu- script First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamtaus- gabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a In the original Jülich.—Ed.

[^3]: After "reactionary" the following is written between the lines: "conservateurs, and if conserved [?], conservateurs — hommes réactionnaires."—Ed.

[^4]: c Marx uses the English term.—Ed.



