---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "4. K. Marx. Page from the Rough Draft of the Manifesto of the Communist Party "
Page_Range: "606-610"
---

# 4. K. Marx. Page from the Rough Draft of the Manifesto of the Communist Party 

Karl Marx

PAGE FROM THE ROUGH DRAFT OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY528

13) Proletarians, for the Ten-Hour Bill without sharing their illusions about the results of this measure.3

We have seen, moreover: The Communists do not put forward a new theory of private property. They merely state the historical fact that the <means of production) b bourgeois production relations and with them bourgeois property relations <and> <eith> <certain> of the <devel> <social> development of the social forces of production no longer <are appropriate> and therefore <to the development of industry itself) (and) in t But do not argue with us because you measure (oppose) the abolition of bourgeois property by your bourgeois ideas of freedom, culture, etc.! Your ideas themselves <are only> <prod> <are> (correspond) are products of the (existing) bourgeois produc- tion and property relations, as your legal system is merely the will of your class elevated into law. (Your> A will whose content is determined by the material living conditions of your class.

(Your) You share with all ruling classes that have perished the biased idea of transforming (the) your (bourgeois) production and property relations from historical, (and merely> transitory relations corresponding only to a certain (stage in the) develop- ment of the productive forces, into eternal laws of nature and reason.

[^1]: a The first two lines are in Jenny Marx's hand. The rest in Marx's.—Ed.

[^2]: b Deletions in the original are given here in angular brackets.—Ed.



The Communists do not put forward any new theory of property. They state a fact. You deny the most striking facts. You have to deny them. You are backward looking Utopians.

Written in December 1847-January 1848

First published as a facsimile in the journal Der Wahre Jakob No. 565 (6), March 17, 1908

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a In the M S. the whole sentence including deleted words is struck out.—Ed. -



* - * ir ,* i. » **

L-» *„ ,f#T^ 5-^ -jib» ****.**•**£

\ ^. ^wjajnl' JSNn'*ik. ******^* ^ * _*#•*% ' ^f kl- • •«^^•J» **77*

Bottom of the page from Marx's manuscript, "Protectionists" with drawings by Engels '

%> t . . LÊL- 4L— - ~ - n V - ~ «.- N ^ ^

[^1]: A page of the rough draft of the Manifesto of the Communist Party



