---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "1. Rules of the Communist League ( June 1847) "
Page_Range: "602-618"
---

# 1. Rules of the Communist League ( June 1847) 

Karl Marx

PROTECTIONISTS324

1) have never protected small industry, only machine industry. Example: the school of List in Germany. Gulich.3

2) If we believe what the protectionists say, they merely preserve the status quo. Protection will never effect sales of the protected product on foreign markets. Hence reactionary.15

3) The last consolation of the protectionists is that the country is not exploited by foreign but by domestic capitalists.

4) It is said, indeed, that internal reforms must first be made before one can think of free trade.c The power to reform the position of the classes is not ascribed to the protective system itself. But they say it would be foolish to reform international relations before domestic relations have been reformed. But what is the protective system? It is proof that the class which carries it into effect has power in its hands. Therefore, given the protective system [] the capitalists will not concede anything. Moreover, gentlemen, great social and historical reforms are never made by concessions, by the generosity of the ruling classes, but only through the nécessité des choses. They must therefore be forced through. It is therefore ridiculous to believe that in a country where the protective system prevails [] [] [] the relations between capital and labour are reformed in any way. I shall say no more of the protectionists [] of the question/

[^1]: Written about September 18, 1847 Printed according to the manu- script First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamtaus- gabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a In the original Jülich.—Ed.

[^3]: After "reactionary" the following is written between the lines: "conservateurs, and if conserved [?], conservateurs — hommes réactionnaires."—Ed.

[^4]: c Marx uses the English term.—Ed.



Karl Marx

DEMAND325

*) Demand. Most economists treat it almost exclusively from the individual standpoint. The world historic development of demand, its first universal development, depends firstly on the products of the various countries of the world becoming known to each other. If in the further course of development demand creates intercourse, initially it is intercourse which creates demand. Demand is the material content of intercourse, the totality of the objects of exchange, of the commodities which come into exchange and trade. Wars, voyages of discovery, etc., all historical events whereby nations are brought into contact, are all so many conditions of expanding demand, of the formation of the world market. The growth of demand consists directly in the first place in the fact that already existing products of various countries <m contact, in A> are being exchanged. Demand gradually loses its local etc. character and becomes cosmopolitan. The production of all countries thus enters more and more into the consumption of the individuals of <all regions) of a country.

The Crusades, for example, by making known the products of the Orient, greatly increased the demand for such products in Western Europe. (Cf. J., Notebook III, p. 106.) Places where these products stream together for exchange constitute the world market towns; the world market appeared in this form in particular before the discovery of America. In the 14th and 15th centuries Constan- tinople, the Italian cities, Bruges and London.

Also still at the same time like fairs, namely the caravan-like streaming together of merchants. In the 19th century, for example, fairs are of quite subordinate significance. (Cf. J., Notebook III, p. 106.)



**[p. 575]**

Trade supremacy. The first dominant trading nation are the Dutch (from end of the 16th to the middle of the 17th century). Until then there were only first trading towns. The Spaniards and Portuguese form the transition from dominant trading towns to dominant trading nations. Carrying trade and fisheries nevertheless still form a decisive constituent of Dutch supremacy.

The <agricultural> European North-East in the relation of an agricultural country to the European West. In the same measure in which here industry and shipbuilding increase, the demand for the raw products of the North-East increases and with it their production.

Holland as the first trading and industrial nation, from the end of the 16th to the middle of the 17th century, is also the first nation for whom its domestic agriculture is insufficient and where the population is growing in far too great a proportion to domestic agriculture. Therefore carries on the first large-scale trade in grain. Amsterdam becomes the chief granary of Western Europe. (Cf. J.,

Notebook III, p. 107).

[^1]: Written in December 1847 Printed according to the manu- script First published in French in the book Karl Marx, Œuvres.Économie. II, Published in English for the first [Paris,] 1968 time



Karl Marx

DRAFT PLAN FOR SECTION III OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY526

First draft

1) <Critique) a Critical Utopian Systems (Communist). 2)

Second draft

1) Reactionary socialism, feudal, religious petty bourgeois. 2) Bourgeois socialism. 3) German philosophical socialism .b

4) Critical Utopian systems of literature. Owen, Cabet, Weitling, Fourier, St. Simon, Babeuf.

[^1]: 5) Direct party literature. 6) Communist literature.327

[^2]: Written at the end of December 1847 or the beginning of January 1848

[^3]: First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt- ausgabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932

[^4]: Printed according to the manu- script

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a This word is struck out in the manuscript.—Ed.

[^7]: Marx added this point in the left-hand margin and accordingly altered the original numbering from 3 to 4, 4 to 5, 5 to 6.



Karl Marx

PAGE FROM THE ROUGH DRAFT OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY528

13) Proletarians, for the Ten-Hour Bill without sharing their illusions about the results of this measure.3

We have seen, moreover: The Communists do not put forward a new theory of private property. They merely state the historical fact that the <means of production) b bourgeois production relations and with them bourgeois property relations <and> <eith> <certain> of the <devel> <social> development of the social forces of production no longer <are appropriate> and therefore <to the development of industry itself) (and) in t But do not argue with us because you measure (oppose) the abolition of bourgeois property by your bourgeois ideas of freedom, culture, etc.! Your ideas themselves <are only> <prod> <are> (correspond) are products of the (existing) bourgeois produc- tion and property relations, as your legal system is merely the will of your class elevated into law. (Your> A will whose content is determined by the material living conditions of your class.

(Your) You share with all ruling classes that have perished the biased idea of transforming (the) your (bourgeois) production and property relations from historical, (and merely> transitory relations corresponding only to a certain (stage in the) develop- ment of the productive forces, into eternal laws of nature and reason.

[^1]: a The first two lines are in Jenny Marx's hand. The rest in Marx's.—Ed.

[^2]: b Deletions in the original are given here in angular brackets.—Ed.



The Communists do not put forward any new theory of property. They state a fact. You deny the most striking facts. You have to deny them. You are backward looking Utopians.

Written in December 1847-January 1848

First published as a facsimile in the journal Der Wahre Jakob No. 565 (6), March 17, 1908

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a In the M S. the whole sentence including deleted words is struck out.—Ed. -



* - * ir ,* i. » **

L-» *„ ,f#T^ 5-^ -jib» ****.**•**£

\ ^. ^wjajnl' JSNn'*ik. ******^* ^ * _*#•*% ' ^f kl- • •«^^•J» **77*

Bottom of the page from Marx's manuscript, "Protectionists" with drawings by Engels '

%> t . . LÊL- 4L— - ~ - n V - ~ «.- N ^ ^

[^1]: A page of the rough draft of the Manifesto of the Communist Party



Karl Marx

NOTES ON THE ARREST, MALTREATMENT AND EXPULSION OF WILHELM WOLFF BY THE BRUSSELS POLICE

FEBRUARY 27 TO MARCH 1, 1848a

Petits Carmes.329 5 étrangers, 34 Belge

Wolff's right eye is so injured it will hardly regain sight. Sunday February 27, between 10 and 11 o'clock in the evening. Real maltreatment in the Hôtel de Ville, blows with the fist from all directions. The real maltreatment first in the police station where there were a number of drunken gardes civiques. Police punched Wolff in the right eye so that the sight

They tore off his glasses, spat in his face, kicked him, punched him, abused him, etc. One of the gardes civiques proved his valour by joining in these manifestations. They tortured him.

In the meantime Hody arrived, chef de la sûreté publique, notorious philanthropist, hypocritical scoundrel.

Wolff had an interview of <1> V2 [hours] with him in the presence of the scoundrel who had arrested him amidst frightful maltreatment.

Hody's indignation at Wolff's visiting him. Spoke furiously against the German Workers' Society.330 "I knew," he said among other things, "that there would be about 2/3 Germans among those arrested tonight." Wolff said ironically: "Oui, insofar as they were already marked in advance for arrest."

Taken from the Permanence to the Amigo.331 Wolff [..?.] t. evening [?]

The whole thing that evening was a provocation organised by the police. The Ministry needed prisoners at any cost, including also Germans.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 567-68.—Ed.

[^2]: eo*





**[p. 582]**

On Monday etc. taken to the Petits Carmes. On Wednesday the 6 arrested foreigners received their expulsion passports. But Wolff's was dated Sunday, February 27, before his arrest. In prison horribly maltreated.

Written early in March 1848

First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamtaus- gabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

APPENDICES



RULES OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE

Working Men of All Countries, Unite!

SECTION I

THE LEAGUE

Art. 1. The League aims at the emancipation of humanity by spreading the theory of the community of property and its speediest possible practical introduction.

Art. 2. The League is divided into communities and circles; at its head stands the Central Authority as the executive organ.

Art. 3. Anyone who wishes to join the League is required :

a. to conduct himself in manly fashion; b. never to have committed a dishonourable action; c. to recognise the principles of the League; d. to have acknowledged means of subsistence; e. not to belong to any political or national association; f. to be unanimously admitted into a community, and g. to give his word of honour to work loyally and to observe secrecy. Art. 4. All League members are equal and brothers, and as such owe each other assistance in every situation. Art. 5. All members bear League names.

Art. 6. A community consists of at least three and at most twelve members. Increase above that number will be prevented by division.

Art. 7. Every community elects a chairman and a deputy chairman. The chairman presides over meetings, the deputy chairman holds the funds, into which the contributions of the members are paid.

Art. 8. The members of communities shall earnestly endeavour to increase the League by attracting capable men and always seek to

[^1]: SECTION II

[^2]: THE COMMUNITY





**[p. 586]**

Art. 9. Admission of new members is effected by the chairman of the community and the member who has introduced the applicant to the League.

Art. 10. The communities do not know each other and bear distinctive names which they choose themselves.

SECTION III

THE CIRCLE

Art. 11. A circle comprises at least two and at most ten communities.

Art. 12. The chairmen and deputy chairmen of the communities form the circle authority. They elect a president from among themselves.

Art. 13. The circle authority is the executive organ for all the communities of the circle.

Art. 14. Isolated communities must either join an already existing circle authority or form a new circle with other isolated communities.

Art. 15. The Central Authority is the executive organ of the whole League.

Art. 16. It consists of at least five members and is elected by the circle authority of the place where it is to have its seat.

Art. 17. The Congress is the legislative authority of the League. Art. 18. Every circle sends one delegate. Art. 19. A Congress is held every year in the month of August. The Central Authority has the right in important cases to call an extraordinary congress.

Art. 20. The Congress in office decides the place where the Central Authority is to have its seat for the current year.

Art. 21. All legislative decisions of the Congress are submitted to the communities for acceptance or rejection.

[^1]: SECTION IV

[^2]: THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY

[^3]: SECTION V

[^4]: THE CONGRESS





**[p. 587]**

SECTION VI

GENERAL REGULATIONS

Art. 23. Anyone who acts dishonourably to the principles of the League is, according to the circumstances, (removed) either removed or expelled. Expulsion precludes re-admission.

Art. 24. Members who commit offences are judged by the (supreme) circle authority, which also sees to the execution of the verdict.

Art. 25. Every community must keep the strictest watch over those who have been removed or expelled; further, it must observe closely any suspect individuals in its locality and report at once to the circle authority anything they may do to the detriment of the League, whereupon the circle authority must take the necessary measures to safeguard the League.

Art. 26. The communities and circle authorities and also the Central Authority shall meet at least once a fortnight.

Art. 27. The communities pay weekly or monthly contributions, the amount of which is determined by the respective circle authorities. These contributions will be used to spread the principles of the community of property and to pay for postage.

Art. 28. The circle authorities must render account of expendi- tures and income to their communities every six months.

Art. 29. The members of the circle authorities and of the Central Authority are elected for one year and must then either be confirmed anew in their office or replaced by others.

Art. 30. The elections take place in the month of September. The electors can, moreover, recall their officers at any time should they not be satisfied with their conduct of their office.

Art. 31. The circle authorities have to see to it that there is material in their communities for useful and necessary discussions. The Central Authority, on the other hand, must make it its duty to send to all circle authorities such questions whose discussion is important for our principle.

Art. 32. Every circle authority and failing that the community, even every League member, must, if standing alone, maintain regular correspondence with the Central Authority or a circle authority.



**[p. 588]**

Art. 34. Every circle authority is free to take any measures which it considers advisable for the security of the circle and its efficient work. These measures must, however, not be contrary to the general Rules.

Art. 35. All proposals for changes in the Rules must be sent to the Central Authority and submitted by it to the Congress for decision.

SECTION VII

ADMISSION

Art. 36. After the Rules have been read to him, the applicant is asked by the two League members mentioned in Art. 9 to reply to the following five questions. If he replies "Yes", he is asked to give his word of honour, and is declared a League member.

These five questions are: a. Are you convinced of the truth of the principles of the community of property?

b. Do you think a strong League is necessary for the realisation of these principles as soon as possible, and do you wish to join such a League?

c. Do you promise always to work by word and deed for spreading and the practical realisation of the principles of the community of property?

d. Do you promise to observe secrecy about the existence and all affairs of the League?

e. Do you promise to comply with the decisions of the League? Then give us on this your word of honour as guarantee!

In the name and by the order of the Congress Heide,3 The President, Secretary Karl Schillb

London,June 9, 1847

[^1]: First published in the book: Gründungs- dokumente des Bundes der Kommunisten (Juni bis September 1847), Hamburg, 1969

[^2]: a Wilhelm Wolff.—Ed. h Karl Schapper.—Edr.

[^3]: Printed according to the manu- script

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



