---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "8. Minutes of Marx's Report to the London German Workers' Educational Society on November 30, 1847 "
Page_Range: "659-661"
---

# 8. Minutes of Marx's Report to the London German Workers' Educational Society on November 30, 1847 

MINUTES OF MARX'S REPORT TO THE LONDON GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL

SOCIETY ON NOVEMBER 30, 1847

From Belgium I have to report that a workers' society has been formed there which at present has 105 members.374 The German workers in Brussels, who formerly were quite isolated, are now already a power, and whereas formerly they were not asked to take part in anything, this year they have already been requested to send a representative of the society to the celebration of the Polish revolution being arranged in Brussels by the city to speak in the name of this society. Should the government press for the suppression of the society, because it is certainly bound to exercise an influence on the Belgian workers themselves, the society has decided to hand over its library, which consists of 300 volumes, and other objects to the London society.

I will now add a few remarks on literature. Louis Blanc now proves in one of his works3 that in the French Revolution, at the same moment when the proletariat stormed the Bastille, the prison for the bourgeois, the bourgeoisie took decisions against those who bought the victory for them with their blood. All the leading figures of the revolution are now presented in their true character, a mass of leaflets are being written in the spirit of the proletariat, which are exercising considerable influence on society. The French work more in the interest of a party than for gain. Before the July revolution0

leaflets circulated in the spirit of the bourgeoisie just as they do now in the spirit of the proletariat.

Of all that has been achieved by German philosophy the critique of religion is the most important thing; this critique, however, has not

[^1]: a L. Blanc, Histoire de la révolution française.—Ed. b Of 1830.—Ed.





**[p. 631]**



[^1]: First published in Archiv für die Geschichte Printed according to the Archiv des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, Te 8 Leipzie 1919 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a G. F. Daumer, Die Geheimnisse des christlichen Altertums.—Ed.



