---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "12. The Association Démocratique of Brussels to the Fraternal Democrats Assembling in London "
Page_Range: "669-672"
---

# 12. The Association Démocratique of Brussels to the Fraternal Democrats Assembling in London 

THE ASSOCIATION DÉMOCRATIQUE OF BRUSSELS

TO THE FRATERNAL DEMOCRATS

ASSEMBLING IN LONDON

We received your letter of December last,3 the proposals contained in which concerning the Democratic Congress of all nations and the establishment of a monthly correspondence between your society and ours were immediately taken into consideration.376

The propositions of holding the first Democratic Congress here in Brussels, with a view of calling the second in London; the first Congress to be called by our society for the anniversary of the Belgian revolution in September next, and the programme of business to be prepared by the committee of this society; these propositions were agreed to unanimously and enthusiastically.

The offer of entering into a regular and monthly correspondence with our society was equally hailed with the greatest enthusiasm.

We now proceed to give you an abstract of our progress and general situation.

The state of our society is as prosperous as can possibly be desired. The number of our members is increasing weekly, and the interest taken by the public in general, and by the working classes in particular, in our proceedings is equally on the increase.

The best proof, however, of our progress is the interest excited in the provinces of the country by our movements. From the most important towns of Belgium we have received summons to send delegates for the purpose of establishing democratic societies similar to ours, and keeping up constant relations with the metropolitan association.

[^1]: "The Fraternal Democrats assembling in London to the Democratic Associa- tion for promoting the fraternity of all nations, assembling in Brussels."—Ed.





**[p. 641]**

We consider the ground gained at Ghent as a most important progress of our cause in this country. Ghent is the chief manufactur- ing town of Belgium, numbering above a hundred thousand inhabitants, and being in a great measure the centre of attraction for the whole labouring population of Flanders. The position taken by Ghent is decisive for all working class movement of the country. Thus we may accept the adhesion of the factory workers of that Belgian Manchester to the revival of a pure democratic movement, as implying and foreboding the adhesion of the generality of the Belgian proletarians.

We hope to report in our next further progress in other towns of the country, thus arriving by-and-by at the reconstitution of a strong, united, and organised democratic party in Belgium.

We entirely share in the view which in your recent address to the working people of Great Britain and Ireland you have taken of the question of "National Defences".3 We hope that this ad- dress will contribute in a great measure to the enlightenment of the people of England as to the question who are their veritable enemies.

We have equally seen with great pleasure the steps taken by the mass of the English Chartists to arrive, at last, at a close alliance between the Irish people and that of Great Britain. We have seen that there is a better chance now than ever before to break down that prejudice which prompted the Irish people to confound in one common hatred the oppressed classes of England with the oppres- sors of both countries. We hope to see very shortly united in the hands of Feargus O'Connor the direction both of the English and the

[^1]: a "The Fraternal Democrats (assembling in London), to the Working Classes of Great Britain and Ireland" (the document is reproduced in Engels' report; see this volume, pp. 466-67).—Ed.





**[p. 642]**

The Committee of the Association Démocratique

L. Jottrand, Chairman K. Marx, Vice-President A. Picard, Avt., Secretary

Brussels, 13th February, 1848

First published in The Northern Star Reprinted from the newspaper No. 541, March 4, 1848

