---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "14. From the Deutsche- Brüsseler- Zeitung's Report on the Brussels Celebration of the Second Anniversary of the 1846 Cracow Insurrection "
Page_Range: "673-674"
---

# 14. From the Deutsche- Brüsseler- Zeitung's Report on the Brussels Celebration of the Second Anniversary of the 1846 Cracow Insurrection 

FROM THE DEUTSCHE-BRÜSSELER-ZEITUNCS REPORT ON THE BRUSSELS CELEBRATION

OF THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF THE 1846 CRACOW INSURRECTION3

The Cracow revolution was celebrated by a numerous gathering on the evening of the 22nd in the hall of the Old Court at Brussels, rue

des soeurs noires, which was festively illuminated and decorated with Polish and Belgian flags. Several speakers, including Lelewel, Karl Marx, F. Engels, Wallau and Lubliner, the lawyer, took the floor and spoke passionately for the purely democratic character of the Cracow insurrection. We shall report this celebration in detail in our next issueb and only remark here that after the public meeting a dinner was held in which about 100 persons took part and at which several toasts were raised by Belgian and German democrats. Nor was the dinner lacking in song.

[^1]: First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Printed according to the news- Zeitung No. 16, February 24, 1848 paper

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 545-52.—Ed. This report was never published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung; the sevente- enth and last issue of the paper appeared on February 27, 1848.—Ed.



