---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "15. To the Citizens, Members of the Provisional Government of the French Republic "
Page_Range: "674-676"
---

# 15. To the Citizens, Members of the Provisional Government of the French Republic 

TO THE CITIZENS, MEMBERS OF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT

OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC379

Brussels, February 28, 1848

Citizens!

The Democratic Association having as its aim the union and brotherhood of all peoples, established a few months ago at Brussels, and composed of members of several European nations which enjoy with the Belgians on their soil institutions which have long allowed the free and public expression of all political and religious opinions, hereby offers you the homage of its congratula- tions upon the great task the French nation has just accomplished, and of its gratitude for the immense service which this nation has just rendered the cause of humanity.

We have already had occasion to congratulate the Swiss for having led, as they did not long ago, in the work for the emancipation of the peoples2 which it has fallen to you to promote with the vigour which the heroic population of Paris always displays when its turn comes. We were counting before long on repeating to the French the message we had addressed to the Swiss. But France has greatly advanced the time when we counted on addressing her.

This is only one reason why all the nations should hasten to follow in your footsteps.

We believe we can be sure in surmising that the nations nearest to France will be the first to follow her in the career on which she has just entered.

This conjecture is all the more certain in that France has just made a revolution destined rather to strengthen the bonds which link it to all nations than to menace the independence of any of them. We

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 624-26.—£d.





**[p. 646]**

We already see the great nation whose destinies you direct today, your sole authority the trust of all, we already see it, citizens, forging again, even with peoples whom she has for long regarded as rivals for power, an alliance which the hateful policy of certain men succeeded in shattering.

England and Germany stretch out their hands once more to your great country. Spain, Italy, Switzerland and Belgium are going either to rise or to remain quiet and free under your threefold aegis.

Poland, like Lazarus, will rise again to the appeal you will make in a threefold language.

It is impossible that Russia itself should not join in, with accents as yet only slightly known to the ear of Western and Southern peoples.

Yours, Frenchmen, yours is the honour, yours is the glory to have laid the main foundations of this alliance of peoples so prophetically sung by your immortal Beranger.

We offer you, citizens, in all the flow of feelings of an immutable fraternity, the tribute of our deepest gratitude.

The Committee of the Democratic Association, whose aim is the union and brotherhood of all peoples, at Brussels.

L. Jottrand, barrister, President

Ch. Marx, Vice-president General Mellinet, Honorary president

Spilthoorn, barrister, President of the Democratic

Association at Ghent Maynz, professor at Brussels University Lelewel F. Balliu, treasurer A. Battaille, Vice-secretary J. Pellering, workman

Labiaux, merchant

[^1]: First published in the newspapers Printed according to La Réforme Le Débat social, March 1, 1848 and La Réforme, March 4, 1848 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in full in English for the first time



