---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "19. Decision of the Central Authority of the Communist League, March 3,1848 , "
Page_Range: "680-682"
---

# 19. Decision of the Central Authority of the Communist League, March 3,1848 , 

DECISION OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE, MARCH 3, 1848380

Working Men of All Countries, Unite!

The Central Authority of the Communist League, meeting in Brussels, in accordance with the decision of the former London Central Authority to move the seat of the Central Authority to Brussels and to dissolve itself as Central Authority, by which decision the circle authority of the Brussels leading circle is therefore constituted the Central Authority, considering:

that in the present circumstances any association of League members, in particular of Germans, is impossible in-Brussels;

that the leading League members there have already been either arrested or expelled or are hourly expecting expulsion from Belgium;

that at the present moment Paris is the centre of the entire revolutionary movement;

that present circumstances require a thoroughly energetic leader- ship of the League, for which temporary discretionary power is indispensable,

decides: Art. 1. The Central Authority is transferred to Paris. Art. 2. The Brussels Central Authority confers on League member Karl Marx full discretionary power for the temporary central direction of all League affairs with responsibility to the Central Authority to be newly constituted and to the next Congress.

Art. 3. It instructs Marx, in Paris, as soon as circumstances permit, to constitute a new Central Authority from the most suitable League members selected by him, and for that purpose even to call to Paris League members not resident there.



**[p. 652]**

Resolved at Brussels, March 3, 1848.

The Central Authority

Signed: Engels, F. Fisher, Gigot, H. Steingens, K. Marx

First published in the book: Wermuth Printed according to the book und Stieber, Die Communisten-Ver- schwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Erster Theil, Berlin, 1853

