---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "20. Travel Document Issued to Marx on His Expulsion from Belgium "
Page_Range: "682-683"
---

# 20. Travel Document Issued to Marx on His Expulsion from Belgium 

TRAVEL DOCUMENT ISSUED TO MARX ON HIS EXPULSION FROM BELGIUM

Ministry of Justice

Administration of Prisons and Public Security

2nd section 2nd Bureau

No. 73946

DESCRIPTION

AGE H E I G H T 1 M E T R E HAIR

28 years'3 centimetres Black FOREHEAD EYEBROWS

Average Black EYES Brown NOSE MOUTH

Average do. BEARD Black SIDE WHISKERS Black MOUSTACHE Black CHIN Round FACE do. COMPLEXION Tanned BUILT DISTINGUISHING MARKS

TRAVEL DOCUMENT

(Law of May 30-June 13, 1790, Decree of May 11, 1815)a

THE ADMINISTRATOR OF PUBLIC SECURITY

invites the civil and military authorities to allow free passage

from Brussels to Quiévrain destination France to M. Marx, Charles

Profession Doctor of Philosophy born at Trier, Prussia residing at—and to give him aid and protection in case of need.

[^1]: Heavy

[^2]: The present travel document is valid for exit from the Kingdom today.

[^3]: Done at Brussels, March 4, 1848

[^4]: Signature of bearer Dr. K.Marx c

[^5]: For THE ADMINISTRATOR OF PUBLIC SECURITY

[^6]: The Head of the Passport Office

[^7]: Becquet

[^8]: First published as a facsimile in the book: S. Z. Leviova, Marx in the German Revolution, 1848-49. Moscow, 1970

[^9]: Printed from the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first

[^10]: a This is followed by the Belgian national coat of arms.— Ed. b Inaccurate: Marx was born in 1818.— Ed. c Signature in Marx's hand.— Ed.



