---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "21. Minutes of the Meeting of the Paris Community of the Communist League, March 8, 1848 "
Page_Range: "683-685"
---

# 21. Minutes of the Meeting of the Paris Community of the Communist League, March 8, 1848 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE PARIS COMMUNITY OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE OF MARCH 8, 1848

MINUTES OF THE COMMUNITY MEETING OF MARCH 8, 1848

Elected Chairman: K. Schapper. Secretary: K. Marx.

Schapper: proposes to constitute ourselves the Paris Circle, no longer a single community.

Supported by Marx and others. Agreed. Admitted: Hermann. Discussion on the re-admission of removed community members;

Born gives a report on the meeting in the café l'Europe; so does Sterbitzki. Resolved by a large majority not to go into this café, where Decker and Venedey hold a meeting.

Engler, Buchfink and Vogler (Weitlingians) unanimously ad- mitted.

Unanimously resolved: the three above-named League members instructed to admit members of the Weitling community whom they consider suitable.

Schilling unanimously admitted. Admitted to the public workers' society as: President: H. Bauer.

Vice-president: Hermann. 2 secretaries: Born and Vogel.

Treasurer. Moll. 3 organisers: Buchfink, Schapper, Home. Agreed that the President shall use the form of address: Friends; anybody else as he likes.

Marx to submit draft Rules for the workers' society. The public society shall be called German Workers' Club.3S1

Wilhelm Höger admitted as League member (proposed by Schapper, supported by H. Bauer).



**[p. 655]**

Secretary K. Marx Chairman K. Schapper

Written by Karl Marx on March 8, 1848 Printed according to the manuscript

First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt- Published in English for the first ausgäbe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 7, 1935 time

