---
Volume: 6
Document_Title: "22. Minutes of the Meeting of the Paris Circle of the Communist League. March 9,1848 "
Page_Range: "685-687"
---

# 22. Minutes of the Meeting of the Paris Circle of the Communist League. March 9,1848 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE PARIS CIRCLE OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE OF MARCH 9, 1848

MEETING OF MARCH 9, 9 P.M.

Marx submits his draft Rules,3 which are discussed. Article 1 adopted with a minority of 2 against. Article 2 adopted unanimously; also Art. 3, Art. 4, Art. 5 and Art. 6.

The draft Rules are therefore adopted without amendments. The Rules of the Communist League are read out by the Secretary. After hearing the Rules the members newly to be admitted declare that they enter the Communist League.

Marx proposes that all members shall give their names and addresses. This is discussed and it is finally resolved that every League member shall give the name by which he is known here, and his address.

Schapper proposes to add another five members to the President and Secretary, so as to form the circle authority of Paris.

One is to be elected from each of the four communities. The elections to be postponed to the next meeting.

Schapper gives a report on the Central Authority. On Schapper's proposal resolved that everybody who speaks rises and removes his hat.

On Marx's proposal the Central Authority will give at the next meeting a report on the situation of the League in general.

Born, who was sent to give a report on the meeting in the manège, returns after three-quarters of an hour and describes the miserable state of this society.382 The next meeting will be held next Saturday at 8 o'clock, café Belge, Rue Grenelle St. Honoré.

[^1]: a Draft Rules of the German Workers' Club (see this volume, p. 654).— Ed.





**[p. 657]**

On Schapper's proposal it is agreed that one member shall buy a blood-red ribbon for all. B. Sax is instructed to do this.

Written by Karl Marx on March 9, 1848 Printed according to the manuscript

First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt- Published in English for the first ausgäbe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 7, 1935 time

