---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "3. Georg Weerth "
Page_Range: "137-141"
---

# 3. Georg Weerth 

- - œ * 5enfxaf-g>rgon ber beuffdjen §o$afomofoatit "**§* -

[GEORG WEERTH]

"SONG OF THE APPRENTICES" by Georg Weerth (1846)59

At the time when the cherries blossomed, In Frankfurt we did stay. At the time when the cherries blossomed, In that city we did stay.

Up spake mine host, the landlord: "Your coats are frayed and worn." "Look here, you lousy landlord, That's none of your concern.

[^1]: "Now give us of your wine, And give us of your beer, And with the beer and wine, Bring us a roast in here."

[^2]: The cock crows in the bunghole, Out comes a goodly flow, And in our mouths it tastes Like urinatio.

[^3]: And then he brought a hare In parsley leaves bedight, And at this poor dead hare We all of us took fright.

[^4]: And when we were in bed, Our nightly prayers reciting, Early and late in bed The bed-bugs kept on biting.

[^5]: It happened once in Frankfurt, That town so fine and fair, That knows who did once dwell And who did suffer there.3

[^6]: 3 Translated into English by Alex Miller.— Ed.





**[p. 109]**

Thaten des berühmten Ritters Schnapphahnski, describing the adven- tures of Prince Lichnowski, who was given that name by Heine in

Atta Troll? The facts are all true; how we found out about them we shall perhaps leave to another time. Those Schnapphahnski feuilletons were published together as a book by Hoffmann and Campe in 1849, and are still today most entertaining. However, since Schnapphahnski-Lichnowski, together with the Prussian General von Auerswald (also a member of parliament), went riding out on September 18, 1848 to spy on the columns of peasants who were joining up with the Frankfurt fighters at the barricades, on which occasion he and Auerswald received their just deserts and were beaten to death by the peasants for spying, the German Imperial Vice-Regent brought charges against Weerth for libelling the deceased Lichnowski, and Weerth, who had now been in England for some time, was given a three months' prison sentence long after the forces of reaction had put paid to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. He then duly served his three months' sentence, because his business interests obliged him to visit Germany from time to time.

In 1850-51 he travelled to Spain on behalf of another Bradford firm, and then to the West Indies and across almost all of South America. After a short visit to Europe he returned to his beloved West Indies. He did not wish to forego the pleasure there of seeing, just once, the real original of Louis Napoleon III, the

[^1]: a The text to the end of the article is checked with the available manu- script.— Ed.

[^2]: h H. Heine, Atta Troll, I.—Ed.





**[p. 110]**

"problems with the quarantine authorities, had to give up his project, and on the trip contracted (yellow) fever, with which he arrived in Havana. He took to his bed, his condition was complicated by inflammation of the brain, and—on July 30—our Weerth died in Havana".

I called him the first and most important poet of the German proletariat. His socialist and political poems are indeed far superior to Freiligrath's in terms of their originality and wit, and particularly in their fervent passion. He often employed forms of Heine's, but only in order to fill them with an entirely original and independent content. At the same time, he differed from most other poets inasmuch as he was totally unconcerned about his poems once he had written them down. Once he had sent a copy to Marx or me, he would forget about the poems and it was often difficult to persuade him to have them printed. Only during the time of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was it otherwise. The reason why is shown by the following extract from a letter Weerth wrote to Marx from Hamburg, April 28, 1851:

"By the way, I hope to see you again in London at the beginning of July, for I cannot bear these GRASSHOPPERS in Hamburg any longer. I stand under threat here of a splendid existence, but it frightens me. Anyone else would seize it with both hands. But I am too old to become a philistine, and across the sea there is the far West

Where Weerth was a master, where he outstripped Heine (because he was more wholesome and unadulterated) and where

[^1]: "Recently I have written all kinds of things, but have completed nothing for I see no point at all, no aim in writing. When you write something on economics there is a point and meaning to it. But me? Cracking feeble jokes, making up cheap jibes in order to squeeze a stupid smile from the faces of the rascals at home — in all seriousness, I know nothing more pitiable! My days as a writer ended well and truly with the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.

[^2]: "I must admit: much as it grieves me to have wasted the last three years on absolutely nothing, it thrills me when I think of the time we spent at Cologne. We did not compromise ourselves. That is the main thing! Since Frederick the Great nobody has treated the German people so completely en canaille3 as the Neue Rheinische Zeitung.

[^3]: "I don't mean to say that the entire credit was due to me; but I was there "O Portugal! O Spain!" (Weerth had just come from there.) "If only we had your beautiful skies, your wine, your oranges and myrtles! But not even that! Nothing but rain and long noses and smoked meat!

[^4]: "Yours in the rain and with a long nose,

[^5]: G. Weerth."

[^6]: a Ungraciously.— Ed.





**[p. 111]**

Moreover Weerth also wrote less offensive things, and I shall allow myself the liberty, from time to time, to send some of them to the feuilleton of the Sozialdemokrat.

[^1]: Written in late May 1883

[^2]: First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 24, June 7, 1883

[^3]: Printed according to the news- paper



