---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "IV. The Grecian Gens "
Page_Range: "233-242"
---

# IV. The Grecian Gens 



**[p. 204]**

Greeks, as well as Pelasgians and other peoples of the same tribal origin, were constituted since prehistoric times in the same organic series as the Americans: gens, phratry, tribe, confederacy of tribes. The phratry might be missing, as among the Dorians; the confederacy of tribes might not yet be developed everywhere, but in every case the gens was the unit. At the time the Greeks entered history, they were on the threshold of civilisation. Almost two entire great periods of development lie between the Greeks and the above-mentioned American tribes, the Greeks of the Heroic Age being by this much ahead of the Iroquois. For this reason the Grecian gens no longer bore the archaic character of

[^1]: IV

[^2]: THE GRECIAN GENS



According to Grote's history of Greece,b the Athenian gens in particular was held together by:

1. Common religious. ceremonies, and exclusive right of the priesthood in honour of a definite god, supposed to be the forefather of the gens, and characterised in this capacity by a special surname.

2. A common burial place (cf. Demosthenes' Eubulides103). 3. Mutual rights of inheritance. 4. Reciprocal obligation to afford help, defence and support against the use of force.

5. Mutual right and obligation to intermarry within the gens in certain cases, especially for orphaned daughters or heiresses.

6. Possession, in some cases at least, of common property, and of an archon (magistrate) and treasurer of its own.

The phratry, binding together several gentes, was less intimate, but here too we find mutual rights and duties of similar character, especially a communion of particular religious rites and the right of prosecution in the event of a phrator being slain. Again, all the phratries of a tribe performed periodically certain common sacred ceremonies under the presidency of a phylobasileus (tribal magistrate), selected from among the nobles (eupatrides).

Thus Grote. And Marx adds: "In the Grecian gens the savage (for example, the Iroquois) is unmistakably discerned."0 He becomes still more unmistakable when we investigate somewhat further.

For the Grecian gens has also the following attributes: 7. Descent according to father right. 8. Prohibition of intermarriage within the gens except in the case of heiresses. This exception, and its formulation as an

[^1]: a The 1884 edition has "punaluan family" instead of "group marriage".— Ed. b G. Grote, A History of Greece, Vol. Ill, pp. 54-55.— Ed. c "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 198.— Ed.





**[p. 206]**

9. The right of adoption into the gens; it was practised by adoption into the family, but with public formalities, and only in exceptional cases.

10. The right to elect and depose the chiefs. We know that every gens had its archon; but nowhere is it stated that this office was hereditary in certain families. Until the end of barbarism, the probability is always against strict0 heredity, which would be totally incompatible with conditions where rich and poor had absolutely equal rights in the gens.

Not only Grote, but also Niebuhr, Mommsen and all other previous historians of classical antiquity, failed with the gens. Although they correctly noted many of its distinguishing features, they always regarded it as a group of families and thus made it impossible for themselves to understand the nature and origin of the gens. Under the gentile constitution, the family was never a unit of organisation, nor could it be, for man and wife necessarily belonged to two different gentes. The gens as a whole belonged to the phratry, the phratry to the tribe; but in the case of the family, half of it belonged to the gens of the husband and half to that of the wife. The state, too, does not recognise the family in public law; to this day it exists only in civil law. Nevertheless, all our historiography so far takes as its point of departure the absurd assumption, which became inviolable particularly in the eighteenth century, that the monogamian individual family, which is scarcely older than civilisation, is the nucleus around which society and the state gradually crystallised.

"Mr. Grote will also please note," adds Marx,104 "that although the Greeks traced their gentes to mythology, the gentes are older than mythology with its gods and demigods, which they themselves had created." d

Grote is quoted with preference by Morgan as a respected

[^1]: a Cited in W. Wachsmuth's Hellenische Alterthumskunde aus dem Gesichtspunkte des Staates, Part 1, Section 1, p. 312.— Ed.

[^2]: b W. A. Becker, Charikles, Bilder altgriechischer Sitte, Part 2, p. 447.— Ed. c The word "strict" was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. d "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 200.— Ed.





**[p. 207]**

"All that we hear of the most ancient Athenian laws is based upon the gentile and phratrie divisions."3

The descent of the gentes from common ancestors has been a brain-racking puzzle to the "school-taught Philistines" (Marx).b

Naturally, since they claim that these ancestors are purely mythical, they are at a loss to explain how the gentes developed out of separate and distinct, originally totally unrelated families; yet they must accomplish this somehow, if only to explain the existence of the gentes. So they circle round in a whirlpool of words and do not get beyond the phrase: the genealogy is indeed mythical, but the gens is real. And finally, Grote says—the bracketed remarks being by Marx—:

"We hear of this genealogy but rarely, because it is only brought before the public in certain cases pre-eminent and venerable. But the humbler gentes had their common rites" (rather peculiar, Mr. Grote!) "and common superhuman ancestor and genealogy, as well as the more celebrated" (how very strange this on the part of humbler gentes!); "the scheme and ideal (my dear Sir! Not ideal, but carnal—germanice0 fleischlichl) basis was the same in all."d

Marx sums up Morgan's reply to this as follows: "The system of consanguinity which pertained to the gens in its archaic form— and which the Greeks once possessed like other mortals— preserved a knowledge of the relationships of all the members of a gens to each other. They learned this for them decisively important fact by practice from early childhood. This fell into desuetude with the rise of the monogamian family. The gentile name created a pedigree beside which that of the individual family was insignificant. This name was now to preserve the fact of the common descent of those who bore it; but the lineage of the gens went so far back that its members could no longer prove the actual relationship existing between them, except in a limited number of

[^1]: a G. Grote, A History of Greece, Vol. Ill, p. 66. See also "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 230.— Ed.

[^2]: b "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 201.— Ed. c In plain German.— Ed. d Here and below see "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 202, and also G. Grote, A History of Greece, Vol. Ill, p. 60.— Ed.





**[p. 208]**

As among the Americans, the phratry was a mother gens, split up into several daughter gentes, and uniting them, often tracing them all to a common ancestor. Thus, according to Grote,

"all the contemporary members of the phratry of Hekataeus had a common god for their ancestor at the sixteenth degree".b

Hence, all the gentes of this phratry were literally brother gentes. The phratry still occurs in Homer as a military unit in that famous passage where Nestor advises Agamemnon: Draw up people by tribes and by phratries so that phratry may support phratry, and tribe tribe.0 Moreover, the phratry has the right and the duty to prosecute the murderer of a phrator, indicating that at an earlier stage it had the duty of blood revenge. Furthermore, it has common shrines and festivals; for the development of all Greek mythology from the traditional old Aryan cult of nature was essentially due to the gentes and phratries and took place within them. The phratry also had a chief (phratriarchos) and, according to de Coulanges, assemblies and binding decisions, a tribunal and an administration.0 Even the state of a later period, while ignoring the gens, left certain public functions to the phratry.

A number of kindred phratries constituted a tribe. In Attica there were four tribes of three phratries each, each phratry consisting of thirty gentes. Such a meticulous demarcation of the groups presupposes a conscious and planned interference with the naturally evolved order of things. On how, when and why this happened Grecian history keeps silent, for the Greeks themselves

[^1]: a Like Morgan, Marx has "Pollux", a 2nd-century Greek scholar, to whom Grote has frequent references.— Ed.

[^2]: b G. Grote, op. cit., Vol. Ill, pp. 58-59. See also "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 202.— Ed

[^3]: c Homer, Iliad, Canto II.— Ed. d Fustel de Coulanges, La cité antique, p. 146.— Ed.



Closely packed in a comparatively small territory as the Greeks were, their dialectal differences were less developed than those in the extensive American forests. Nevertheless, even here we find only tribes of the same main dialect united in a larger whole; and even little Attica had its own dialect, which was later to become dominant as the universal language of prose.

In the epics of Homer we mostly find the Grecian tribes already combined into small peoples, within which, however, the gentes, phratries and tribes still retained their full independence. They already lived in walled cities. The population increased with the growth of the herds, with field agriculture and the beginnings of the handicrafts. With this came increased differences in wealth, which gave rise to an aristocratic element within the old naturally evolved democracy. The separate small peoples engaged in constant warfare for the possession of the best land and also for the sake of loot. The enslavement of prisoners of war was already a recognised institution.

The constitution of these tribes and small peoples was as follows:

1. The permanent authority was the council (boulé), originally composed, most likely, of the chiefs of the gentes, but later on, when their number became too large, of a selection, which created the opportunity to develop and strengthen the aristocratic element. Dionysius definitely speaks of the council of the Heroic Age as being composed of notables (kratistoi).a The council had the final decision in important matters. In Aeschylus, the council of Thebes passes a decision definitive in the given case that the body of Eteocles be buried with full honours, and the body of Polynices be thrown out to be devoured by the dogs.b Later, with the rise of the state, this council was transformed into a senate.

2. The popular assembly (agora). Among the Iroquois we saw that the people, men and women, stood in a circle around the council meetings, taking an orderly part in the discussions and thus influencing its decisions. Among the Homeric Greeks, this Umstand? to use an old German legal expression, had already developed into a plenary assembly of the people, as was also the case with the ancient Germans. The assembly was convened by the

[^1]: a Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, II, 12.— Ed. b Aeschylus, The Seven Against Thebes, III, 2.— Ed. c Umstand: Those standing around.— Ed.



"whenever a matter is discussed that requires the co-operation of the people for its execution, Homer gives us no indication of any means by which the people could be forced into it against their will".

At this time, when every adult male member of the tribe was a warrior, there was as yet no public authority separated from the people that could have been set against it. Naturally evolved democracy was still in full bloom, and this must remain the point of departure in judging the power and status of the council and of the basileus.

3. The military commander (basileus). On this point, Marx makes the following comment: "The European savants, most of them born servants of princes, represent the basileus as a monarch in the modern sense. The Yankee republican Morgan objects to this. Very ironically, but, truthfully, he says of the oily Gladstone and his Juventus Mundi:

" 'Mr. Gladstone, who presents to his readers the Grecian chiefs of the Heroic Age as kings and princes, with the superadded qualities of gentlemen, is forced to admit that on the whole we seem to have the custom or law of primogeniture sufficiently, but not oversharply defined.' " a

As a matter of fact, Mr. Gladstone himself must realise that such a contingent system of primogeniture, sufficiently but not over- sharply defined, is as good as none at all.

What the position as regards heredity was in the case of the offices of chiefs among the Iroquois and other Indians we have already seen. All officials were elected, mostly within the gens, and were, to that extent, hereditary in the gens. Gradually, vacancies came to be filled preferably by the next gentile relative—the brother or the sister's son—unless good reasons existed for passing him over. The fact that in Greece, under father right, the office of basileus was generally transmitted to the son, or one of the sons, only indicates that the probability of succession by public election was in favour of the sons; but it by no means implies legally binding succession without public election. What we have here, among the Iroquois and Greeks, are the first rudiments of special aristocratic families within the gentes and, among the Greeks, also the first rudiments of a future hereditary chieftain-

[^1]: a L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 248; "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 206.— Ed.





**[p. 211]**

In the Iliad the ruler of men, Agamemnon, appears, not as the supreme king of the Greeks, but as supreme commander of a federal army before a besieged city. And when dissension broke out among the Greeks, it is to this quality of his that Odysseus points in the famous passage: the rule of many is not a good thing; let us have one commander, etc. (to which the popular verse about the sceptre was added later).3 "Odysseus is not here lecturing on the form of government, but is demanding obedience to the supreme commander of the army in the field. For the Greeks, who appear before Troy only as an army, the proceedings in the agora are sufficiently democratic. When speaking of gifts, that is, the division of the spoils, Achilles never makes Agamem- non or some other basileus the divider, but always the 'sons of the Achaeans', i.e. the people. The attributes 'begotten of Zeus', 'nourished by Zeus', do not prove anything because every gens is descended from some god, and the gens of the tribal chief from a 'prominent' god, in this case Zeus. Even personally unfree, such as the swineherd Eumaeus and others, are 'divine' (dioi or theioi), and this in the Odyssey, and hence in a much later period than the Iliad. Likewise in the Odyssey, we find the name of heros given to the herald Mulios as well as to the blind bard Demodocus.b In short, the word basileia, which the Greek writers apply to Homer's so-called kingship (because military leadership is its chief distin- guishing mark), with the council and popular assembly alongside of it, means merely—military democracy." (Marx.)c

Besides military functions, the basileus also had priestly and judicial functions; the latter were not clearly specified, but the former he exercised in his capacity of supreme representative of the tribe, or of the confederacy of tribes. There is no reference anywhere to civil, administrative functions; but it seems that he was ex officio a member of the council. Etymologically, it is quite correct to translate basileus as König (king), because König (kuning)

[^1]: a Homer, Iliad, Canto II.— Ed. b In "Marx's Excerpts" here follows the sentence omitted by Engels: "the term kairanos used by Odysseus along with basileus, in regard to Agamemnon, also means merely 'commander in the field'".— Ed.

[^2]: c "Marx's Excerpts", op. cit., p. 207. Marx quotes Morgan (Ancient Society, pp. 248-49) with some additions. Engels also makes some abridgements and changes here.— Ed.

[^3]: 16-1243





**[p. 212]**

Hence, the basileus had no governmental power in the later sense.*

Thus, in the Grecian constitution of the Heroic Age, we still find the old gentile system full of vigour; but we also see the beginning of its decay: father right and the inheritance of property by the children, which favoured the accumulation of wealth in the family and gave the latter power as against the gens; differentiation in wealth affecting in turn the social constitution by creating the first rudiments of a hereditary nobility and monarchy; slavery, first limited to prisoners of war, but already opening up the prospect of the enslavement of fellow members of the tribe and even of the gens; the degeneration of the old intertribal warfare into systematic robbery on land and sea for the purpose of capturing cattle, slaves and treasure, into a regular source of income. In short, wealth is praised and respected as the highest treasure, and the old gentile systems are abused in order to justify forcible robbery of wealth. Only one thing was missing: an institution that would not only safeguard the newly acquired wealth of individuals against the communistic traditions of the gentile system, would not only sanctify private property, formerly held in such low esteem, and pronounce this sanctification the supreme purpose of every human society, but would also stamp the successively developing new forms of acquiring property, and consequently, of constantly accelerating the increase in wealth,

[^1]: * Like the Grecian basileus, the Aztec military chief has been wrongly presented as a prince in the modern sense. Morgan was the first to subject to historical criticism the reports of the Spaniards, who at first misunderstood and exaggerated, and later deliberately misrepresented things; he showed that the Mexicans were in the middle stage of barbarism, but on a higher plane than the New Mexican Pueblo Indians,106 and that their constitution, so far as the garbled accounts enable us to judge, corresponded to the following: a confederacy of three tribes, which had made a number of others tributary, and which was governed by a Federal Council and a federal military chief, whom the Spaniards had made into an "emperor". [See L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 186-214.— Ed.]

[^2]: a Thucydides, The History of the Peloponnesian War, Book I, Ch. 13.— Ed b Aristotle, Politics, Book III, Ch. 10.— Ed



