---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "11. England in 1845 and in 1885 "
Page_Range: "324-331"
---

# 11. England in 1845 and in 1885 

The Official Journal of the Socialist League.

Vot. 1.—No. 2. MABCH, 1885. 0 » Raarr.

ENGLAND IN 1845 AND IN 1885 !

Forty years ago England stood face to face with a crisis, solvable to all appearances by force only. The immense and rapid development of manufactures had outstripped the extension of foreign markets and the increase of demand. Every ten years the march of industry was violently interrupted by a general commercial crash, followed, after a long period of chronic depression, by a few short years of prosperity, and always ending in feverish over-production and consequent renewed collapse. The capitalist class clamored for Free Trade in corn,154 and threatened to enforce it by sending the starving population of the towns back to the country districts, whence they came: to invade them, as John Bright said, not as paupers begging for bread, but as an army quartered upon the enemy.155 The working masses of the towns demanded their share of political power—the People's Charter156; they were supported by the majority of the small trading class, and the only difference between the two was whether the Charter should be carried by physical or by moral force.3 Then came the commercial crash of 1847 and the Irish famine, and with both the prospect of revolution.

The French Revolution of 1848 saved the English middle class. The Socialistic pronunciamentoes of the victorious French work- men frightened the small middle class of England and disorganised the narrower, but more matter-of-fact, movement of the English working class. At the very moment Chartism was bound to assert itself in its full strength, it collapsed internally, before even it

[^1]: a Instead of "by physical or by moral force" the German translation has "forcibly or lawfully".— Ed.





**[p. 296]**

The Reform Bill of 1831 158 had been the victory of the whole capitalist class over the landed aristocracy. The repeal of the Corn Laws 159 was the victory of the manufacturing capitalists not only over the landed aristocracy, but over those sections of capitalists too whose interests were more or lessb bound up with the landed interest: bankers, stock-jobbers, fundholders, etc. Free Trade meant the re-adjustment of the whole home and foreign commercial and financial policy of England in accordance with the interests of the manufacturing capitalists—the class which now represented the nation. And they set about this task with a will. Every obstacle to industrial production was mercilessly removed. The tariff and the whole system of taxation were revolutionised. Everything was made subordinate to one end, but that end of the utmost importance to the manufacturing capitalist: the cheapening of all raw produce, and especially of the means of living of the working class; the reduction of the cost of raw material, and the keeping down—if not as yet the bringing down—of wages. England was to become the "workshop of the world" 160; all other countries were to become for England what Ireland already was — markets for her manufactured goods, supplying her in return with raw materials and food. England the great manufac- turing centre of an agricultural world, with an ever-increasing number of corn and cotton-growing Irelands,0 revolving around her, the industrial sun. What a glorious prospect!

The manufacturing capitalists set about the realisation of this their great object with that strong common sense and that contempt for traditional principles which has ever distinguished them from their more narrow-mindedd compeers on the Conti- nent. Chartism was dying out. The revival of commercial prosperity, natural6 after the revulsion of 1847 had spent itself, was put down altogether to the credit of Free Trade. Both these circumstances had turned the English working class, politically, into the tail of the great Liberal party/ the party led by the

[^1]: a The German translation has "The political action".— Ed. b The German translation has "identical or" instead of "more or less".— Ed.

[^2]: c The German translation has "satellites" instead of "Irelands".—Ed. d The German translation has "more philistine" instead of "more narrow- minded".— Ed.

[^3]: e The German translation further has "and almost self-evident".— Ed. f In the German translation the expression "great Liberal party" is given in inverted commas.— Ed.





**[p. 297]**

The Revolution of 1848, not less than many of its predecessors, has had strange bed-fellows and successors.0 The very people who put it down, have become, as Karl Marx used to say, its testamentary executors. Louis Napoleon had to create an independ- ent and united Italy, Bismarck had to revolutionise Germany and to restore*1 Hungarian independence and the English manufactur- ers had e to enact the People's Charter.

[^1]: a The German translation has here "strong Chartist opposition".— Ed. b Here and below the words in quotes relate the contents of the People's Charter.—Ed.

[^2]: c The German translation has "a strange fate" instead of "strange bed fellows and successors".— Ed.

[^3]: d In the German translation here follow the words "a certain".— Ed. e The German translation has "had nothing better to do than".— Ed.





**[p. 298]**

And the condition of the working class during this period? There was temporary improvement even for the great mass. But this improvement always was reduced to the old level by the influx of the great body of the unemployed reserve, by the constant superseding of hands by new machinery, by the immigration of the agricultural population,3 now, too, more and more superseded by machines.

A permanent improvement can be recognised for two "pro- tected" sections only of the working class. Firstly, the factory hands. The fixing by Act of Parliament of their working day within relatively rational limits,b has restoredc their physical constitution and endowed them with a moral superiority, en- hanced by their local concentration. They are undoubtedly better off than before 1848. The best proof is that out of ten strikes they make, nine are provoked by the manufacturers in their own interests, as the only means of securing a reduced production. You can never get the masters to agree to work "short time," let manufactured goods be ever so unsaleable; but get the workpeople to strike, and the masters shut their factories to a man.

Secondly, the great Trades' Unions. They are the organisations of those trades in which the labor of grown-up men predominates, or is alone applicable. Here the competition neither of women and children nor of machinery has so far weakened their organised strength. The engineers, the carpenters and joiners, the brick- layers, are each of them a power, to that extent that, as in the case of the bricklayers and bricklayers' labourers, they can even

[^1]: a The German translation has "workers" instead of "population".— Ed. b The German translation has "a normal working day in their favour" instead of "their working day within relatively rational limits".— Ed.

[^2]: c The German translation has "restored to a certain extent".— Ed.





**[p. 299]**

But as to the great mass of the working people, the state of misery and insecurity in which they live now is as low as ever, if not lower. The East-end of London is an ever-spreading pool of stagnant misery and desolation, of starvation when out of work, and degradation, physical and moral, when in work. And so in all other large towns—abstraction made of the privileged minority of the workers; and so in the smaller towns and in the agricultural districts. The law which reduces the value of labor-power to the value of the necessary means of subsistence, and the other law which reduces its average price as a rule to the minimum of those means of subsistence: these laws act upon them with the irresistible force of an automatic engine, which crushes them between its wheels.

This, then, was the position created by the Free Trade policy of 1847, and by twenty years of the rule of the manufacturing capitalists. But then a change came. The crash of 1866 was, indeed, followed by a slight and short revival about 1873; but that did not last. We did not, indeed, pass through the full crisis at the time it was due, in 1877 or 1878; but we have had, ever since 1876, a chronic state of stagnation in all dominant branches of industry. Neither will the full crash come; nor will the period of longed-for prosperity to which we used to be entitled before and after it. A dull depression, a chronic glut of all markets for all trades, that is what we have been living in for nearly ten years. How is this?

The Free Trade theory was based upon one assumption: that England was to be the one great manufacturing centre of an agricultural world. And the actual fact is that this assumption has turned out to be a pure delusion. The conditions of modern

[^1]: a The German translation adds here: "(as well as venerable Lujo Bren- tano)".— Ed.





**[p. 300]**

But the manufacturing monopoly of England is the pivot of the present social system of England. Even while that monopoly lasted the markets could not keep pace with the increasing productivity of English manufacturers; the decennial crises were the conse- quence. And new markets are getting scarcer every day, so much so that even the negroes of the Congo are now to be forced into the civilisation attendant upon Manchester calicoes, Staffordshire pottery, and Birmingham hardware. How will it be when Continental, and especially American goods, flow in in ever increasing quantities—when the predominating share, still held by British manufactures, will become reduced from year to year? Answer, Free Trade, thou universal panacea?

I am not the first to point this out. Already, in 1883, at the Southport meeting of the British Association,163 Mr. Inglis Palgrave, the President of the Economical section, stated plainly that

But what is to be the consequence? Capitalist production cannot stop. It must go on increasing and expanding, or it must die. Even now, the mere reduction of England's lion's share in the supply of the world's markets means stagnation, distress, excess of capital here, excess of unemployed work-people there. What will it be when the increase of yearly production is brought to a complete stop?

Here is the vulnerable place, the heel of Achilles, for capitalist production. Its very basis is the necessity of constant expansion, and this constant expansion now becomes impossible. It ends in a

[^1]: "the days of great trade profits in England were over, and there was a pause in the progress of several great branches of industrial labour. The country might almost be said to be entering the non-progressive state."a

[^2]: a "Address by R. H. Inglis Palgrave, F.R.S., F.S.S., President of the Section" in Report of the Fifty-Third Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science; held at Southport in September 1883, pp. 608-09.— Ed.





**[p. 301]**

And the working class? If even under the unparalleled commercial and industrial expansion, from 1848 to 1868, they have had to undergo such misery; if even then the great bulk of them experienced at best a temporary improvement of their condition, while only a small, privileged, "protected" minority was permanently benefited, what will it be when this dazzling period is brought finally to a close; when the present dreary stagnation shall not only become intensified, but this its intensified condition shall become the permanent and normal state of English trade?

The truth is this: during the period of England's industrial monopoly the English working class have to a certain extent shared in the benefits of the monopoly. These benefits were very unequally parcelled out amongst them; the privileged minority pocketed most, but even the great mass had at least a temporary share now and then. And that is the reason why since the dying-out of Owenism there has been no Socialism in England. With the breakdown of that monopoly the English working class will lose that privileged position; it will find itself generally—the privileged and leading minority not excepted — on a level with its fellow-workers abroad. And that is the reason why there will be Socialism again in England.

Frederick Engels

[^1]: Written in mid-February 1885 Reproduced from the magazine collated with the German transla- First published in The Commonweal, .• No. 2, March 1885



