---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "12. Preface to the Third German Edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte by Marx "
Page_Range: "331-333"
---

# 12. Preface to the Third German Edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte by Marx 



**[p. 302]**

PREFACE TO THE THIRD GERMAN EDITION OF THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE OF LOUIS BONAPARTE BY MARX

The fact that a new edition of the Eighteenth Brumaire* has become necessary, thirty-three years after its first appearance, proves that even today this little book has lost none of its value.

It was indeed a work of genius. Immediately after the event that struck the whole political world like a thunderbolt from the blue, that was condemned by some with loud cries of moral indignation and accepted by others as a salvation from the revolution and a punishment for its errors, but was only wondered at by all and understood by none—immediately after this event Marx appeared with a concise, epigrammatic exposition that laid bare the whole course of French history since those February days in its inner connection, reduced the miracle of December 2 164 to a natural, necessary result of this connection and, in so doing, did not even need to treat the hero of the coup d'état otherwise than with the contempt he so well deserved. And the picture was drawn with such a masterly hand that every fresh disclosure since made has only provided fresh proof of how faithfully it reflects reality. This eminent understanding of the living history of the day, this clear-sighted appreciation of events at the moment they occur, is indeed without parallel.

But this also called for Marx's thorough knowledge of French history. France is the land where, more than anywhere else, historical class struggles were each time fought out to a decision and where, consequently, the changing political forms within which they move and in which their results are condensed have

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 99-197.— Ed.





**[p. 303]**

But there was yet another circumstance. It was the very same Marx who had first discovered the great law of motion of history, the law according to which all historical struggles, whether they proceed in the political, religious, philosophical or some other ideological domain, are in fact only the more or less clear expression of struggles between social classes, and that the existence and thereby the collisions, too, of these classes are in turn conditioned by the degree of development of their economic position, by the nature and mode of their production and of their exchange as determined by it. This law, which has the same significance for history as the law of the transformation of energy has for natural science—this law gave him here, too, the key to understanding the history of the Second French Republic. He put his law to the test on these historical events, and even after thirty-three years we must still say that it has stood the test brilliantly.

F. E.

[^1]: Written in the first half of 1885 Printed according to the text of the book First published in Karl Marx,

[^2]: Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, Hamburg, 1885



