---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "35. Preface to the Pamphlet Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy "
Page_Range: "548-550"
---

# 35. Preface to the Pamphlet Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy 



**[p. 519]**

[PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET LUDWIG FEUERBACH AND THE END OF CLASSICAL GERMAN PHILOSOPHY3]

In the preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Berlin, 1859, Karl Marx relates how the two of us in Brussels in the year 1845 decided "to set forth together our conception" — the materialist conception of history which was elaborated mainly by Marx—"as opposed to the ideological one of German philosophy, in fact to settle accounts with our former philosophical conscience. The intention was carried out in the form of a critique of post-Hegelian philosophy. The manuscript,6

two large octavo volumes, had long ago reached the publishers in Westphalia when we were informed that owing to changed circumstances it could not be printed. We abandoned the manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the mice all the more willingly since we had achieved our main purpose—self- clarification."0

Since then more than forty years have elapsed and Marx died without either of us having had an opportunity of returning to the subject. We have expressed ourselves in various places regarding our relation to Hegel, but nowhere in a comprehensive, coherent account. To Feuerbach, who after all in some respects forms an intermediate link between Hegelian philosophy and our concep- tion, we never returned.

In the meantime the Marxian world outlook has found adherents far beyond the boundaries of Germany and Europe and

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 353-98.— Ed. b K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology.—Ed. c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (present edition, Vol. 29, p. 264).— Ed.





**[p. 520]**

In these circumstances a short, coherent account of our relation to Hegelian philosophy, of how we proceeded, as well as of how we departed, from it, appeared to me to be increasingly necessary. Equally, a full acknowledgement of the influence which Feuer- bach, more than any other post-Hegelian philosopher, had upon us during our Sturm und Drang period,425 appeared to me to be an undischarged debt of honour. I therefore willingly seized the opportunity when the editors of the Neue Zeit asked me for a critical review of Starcke's book on Feuerbach. My contribution was published in that journal in the fourth and fifth numbers of 1886 and appears here in revised form as a separate publication.

Before sending these lines to press I have once again ferreted out and looked over the old manuscript of 1845-46. The section dealing with Feuerbach is not completed. The finished portion consists of an exposition of the materialist conception of history which proves only how incomplete our knowledge of economic history still was at that time. It contains no criticism of Feuerbach's doctrine itself; for the present purpose, therefore, it was useless. On the other hand, in an old notebook of Marx's I have found the eleven theses on Feuerbach printed here as an appendix.3 These are notes hurriedly scribbled down for later elaboration, absolutely not intended for publication, but invaluable as the first document in which is deposited the brilliant germ of the new world outlook.

London, February 21, 1888 Frederick Engels

[^1]: First published in F. Engels, Ludwig Printed according to the book Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen deutschen Philosophie, Stuttgart, 1888

[^2]: a K. Marx, "Theses on Feuerbach".— Ed.



