---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "2. On the Peasant War "
Page_Range: "583-585"
---

# 2. On the Peasant War 



**[p. 554]**

ON THE PEASANT WAR

Reformation—Lutheran and Calvinist—bourgeoisie's revolution No. 1, in which Peasant War is the critical episode. Dissolution of feudalism, along with the development of towns, both decentralis- ing, absolute monarchy therefore a virtual necessity for holding together the nationalities. Had to be absolute, precisely because of the centrifugal nature of all the elements. Absolute not to be understood in the vulgar sense, however: constantly at odds partly with the Estates, partly with rebellious feudal lords and towns; the Estates nowhere abolished; thus better described as an Estate monarchy (still feudal, decaying feudal and embryonic bourgeois).

Victory of revolution No. 1, which was much more European than the English one, and became European much more quickly than the French one, in Switzerland, Holland, Scotland, Eng- land—to a certain extent in Sweden, too, already [under] G[ustavus] Vasa, and Denmark, here not until 1660 in orthodox, absolutist form.

I.a Causes in Germany. History from beginning. Germany broken after the heroic age of the migration of peoples. Only restored from France, by Charlemagne. Hence Roman empire

[^1]: a In the manuscript the text marked "I" by Engels is placed after that marked "II".—Ed.





**[p. 555]**

II. With the Renaissance in its European guise based on general decay of feudalism and rise of the towns. Then absolutist national monarchies—everywhere except in Germany and Italy.

III. Character of the Reformation as sole possible, popular expression of universal aspirations, etc.

Written at the end of 1884 Printed according to the manu- script First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a Save in the case of revolution.— Ed.



