---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "4. Chartist Agitation "
Page_Range: "595-607"
---

# 4. Chartist Agitation 

[ C H A R T I S T A G I T A T I O N ]

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE

Melbourne—September '41, Whig :

1838. August 6.

September 17.

December 13.

1839. January 15.

" 2 1 , 22.

February 5.

March 16.

April 1.

Meeting in Birmingham (speakers: Att- wood, Scholefield, F. O'Connor) to peti- tion the House of Commons to make the People's Charter law.b

Chartist meeting in New Palace Yard, Westminster.0

[^1]: 20.

[^2]: Royal proclamation that torchlight meet- ings and armed assemblies illegal. Meeting of the ANTI-CORN LAW LEAGUE in Manchester.

[^3]: ANTI-CORN LAW meeting in Birmingham: Chartist resolution CARRIED, that universal suffrage takes priority.— In Leeds UNSUC- CESSFUL. ANTI-CORN LAW meetings [in] Manchester and Edinburgh. In the Queen's Speech Chartists threatened with the law. Chartist CONVENTION AT CROWN AND ANCHOR. PHYSICAL FORCE PROCLAIMED BY O'Connor AND Harney. Meeting in Edinburgh TO SUPPORT minis- ters. T h e Chartists won and threw the

[^4]: a The date when the Melbourne Whig Cabinet fell.— Ed. b In the manuscript this sentence is crossed out by a vertical line.— Ed. c In the next three dates in the manuscript some of the words are crossed out.— Ed.



THEIR RESOLUTION. April 29. Chartist RIOTS in Llanidloes.—The Char- tists in control of the town for a while. (In Newport shortly before, John Frost removed from the MAGISTRACY.) May 8. H. Vincent arrested FOR INCITING TO RIOT at Newport. (Ministerial crisis—replâtrage.3) " 13. The rest of the Chartist CONVENTION (thus the petty bourgeois out) removed to Birmingham. 50,000 men received and led through the city. Manifesto passed immediately at the first session: TO WITHDRAW ALL THEIR MONEY FROM BANKS, TO DEAL EXCLU- SIVELY WITH CHARTISTS AND TO HAVE A SACRED

MONTH 4 8 0 AND TO ARM.— F. O ' C o n n o r d e - mands that the petition to the Queen b to appoint a Chartist ministry should be presented peacefully by 500,000 men armed with rifles. May 25. Meeting in Kersal Moor. F. O'Connor says he came because the meeting had been declared illegal by the magistracy. June 14. Attwood presents the Chartist Petition, 1,280,000 signatures. URGENCY REFUSED BY 235:46. " 18. Grote's MOTION ON BALLOT rejected 333:216. July 4. Chartist RIOTS in Birmingham, Bull Ring meeting broken up by police and army. Secretary of the CONVENTION0 arrested. The CONVENTION protests. " 15. Bull Ring riots again, procession through the town, looting, several shops burnt down. Army called out, NO LOSS OF LIFE.

[^1]: " 18. Llanidloes RIOTERS SENTENCED TO IMPRISONMENT. " 20. RIOTS [in] Newcastle. August 2. Vincent & Co. sentenced to imprison- ment AT Monmouth. " 3. Birmingham RIOTERS TRIED, 3 sentenced to death, but REPRIEVED.

[^2]: a Here: patching up.— b Victoria.— Ed. c William Lovett.— Ed.

[^3]: Ed.





**[p. 568]**

ON THE PRESENT AWFUL STATE OF.THE COUNTRY. 11. St. Paul's Church [in London] and the Manchester OLD CHURCH occupied by Chartists during the sermon, which did not lead to anything. " 12. Manchester, Macclesfield, Bolton, etc. At- tempt to go through with the three-day SACRED MONTH. Feeble and unsuccessful. " 15. Chester ASSIZES. J. R. Stephens' TRIAL for UNLAWFUL MEETING AND EXCITING TO RIOT AT Cot- ton Tree, Hyde. That was the meeting where the volleys were fired.— 18 MONTHS Knutsford.

" 27. PARLIAMENT PROROGUED. 30. Nouveau replâtrage ministeriell September 14. DISSOLUTION OF CHARTIST NATIONAL CONVENTION. " 20. F. O'Connor ARRESTED, Manchester, SEDI- TION. " 23. Ebenezer Elliott accuses the Chartists of being Tory agents (Sheffield). November 4. Newport RIOTS. T h e HILL MEN under Frost and Williams march on the town, meet u p at Tredegar Park with Jones' column (from Pontypool) and attack the soldiers, who had already been summoned (to protect the assembled magistrates). Skir- mish. 9 dead are left lying there, others and the wounded carried off. Frost arrested the next morning. T h e soldiers commanded by a lieutenant! Williams apprehended soon after.—TRIAL De- cember 31-January 8. According to one witness the Welsh Mail to Birmingham was to be stopped, and its non-arrival was to be the signal to strike in the Midlands

[^1]: a New ministerial patch-up.— Ed.





**[p. 569]**

1840. January 13. Resumption of ANTI-CORN LAW agitation with BANQUET and meeting in Manchester. " 16. Parliament opened. March . T h e ministry twice defeated in the HOUSE

OF COMMONS. Start of the BLASPHEMY PROSECU- TIONS by HOME SECRETARY'S COMMITTEE. " 17. F. O'Connor TRIED at York ASSIZE. N O W

DEFERRED.

" 25. Meeting of the ANTI-CORN LAW LEAGUE. Palace Yard. Resolution PASSED. " 3 1 . T o date total of ANTI-CORN LAW petition

signatures only 980,352. April 8. Bronterre O'Brien, Liverpool ASSIZES, 18

MONTHS IMPRISONMENT FOR SEDITION. " 11. F. O'Connor 18 MONTHS IN York Castle FOR LIBEL, treated like a common criminal (F. O'Connor's letter April 20). August 4. Lord Ashley CARRIES ADDRESS TO CROWN a on child labour (thus only because of LIBER- ALS' weakness!) " 11. Parliament closed. November 6. Hetherington condemned for BLASPHEMY, SENTENCE DEFERRED.

[^1]: 1841. January 2 1 . RADICAL MEETING AT Leeds for unity with the Chartists. But only agreed on UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE, not on the other points of the Charter. " 26. Parliament opened. February 16. MINISTRY DEFEATED BY 31 OUT OF 223. April 29. ANTI-CORN LAW MEETINGS in Deptford, in vain, in Leeds actually broken u p by Chartists. Russell wishes to tinker with CORN LAWS. May 7. MINISTRY DEFEATED 36 OUT OF 598. " 25. Duncombe presents Chartists' petition (amnesty), 1,300,000 signatures, the ANTI- CORN LAW only 474,448.

[^2]: a Queen Victoria.— Ed.





**[p. 570]**

" 4.

" 23.

August 19.

» 28.

October 7.

November 10.

December 29.

1842. January 7.

February 1.

" 2. " 3. " 9.

March 11.

May 2.

GREAT DISTRESS IN MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS Leeds, Paisley, Glasgow, Bradford, Not- tingham, etc. T r a d e Convention in Derby, for FREE TRADE. Bankruptcies in Glasgow.

CHARTIST CONVENTION in Glasgow, F. O'Con- nor there.

ANTI-CORN LAW Meeting broken u p by Chartists in Southampton with Tory help?

Peel's budget—tariffs of £1,200,000 abolished, particularly on raw materials and semi-manufactures. INCOME TAX. T h e SLIDING SCALE becomes law (ROYAL ASCENT) April 29. Chartist Petition with 3,317,702 signa- tures carried to Parliament in procession from Lincoln's I n n Fields. H a d to be taken to pieces because the door too small. Duncombs demands that the Peti- tion should be heard by COUNCIL AT THE BAR. 49:287.

[^1]: ANTI-CORN LAW Bazar in Manchester. Parliament opened. Peel proposes the SLIDING SCALE 20/- at 5 1 / - corn price, 1/- at 73/- corn price.3

[^2]: a From the maximum duty of 20s. at the price of 51s. and lower per quarter to the minimum duty of Is. at the price of 73s. and higher per quarter.— Ed.



I n I r e l a n d PROVISION RIOTS, in E n n i s a s h i p c a r r y i n g f l o u r l o o t e d , in C o r k futile assault o n t h e POTATO MARKET. " 7. A s h l e y i n t r o d u c e s a FACTORY BILL, RESTRICTING WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S LABOUR IN MINES AND

FACTORIES. June 25. Leeds Mercury says 4,025 FAMILIES, = 1/s of the town's population receiving POOR RE- LIEF. Great "DISTRESS" everywhere. " 28. Peel's tariff through the Commons. July 4 through the Lords 2ND READING. July 1. DEBATE ON DISTRESS. N O result, as usual. In Ireland AGRARIAN OUTRAGES all the time.

[^1]: " 2. FOOD RIOTS [in] Dumfries, several meal- mongers' shops looted. " 5. ANTI-CORN LAW CONFERENCE in London. Bright's threatening speech. Reports that in Sheffield 10,000 PEOPLE IN EXTREME DIS- TRESS, in Wolverhampton 62 blast fur- naces idle, in Stockport the POOR RATE of 2/- in the £ produces only £3,600, whereas in 1839 l/8d. had produced £5,000. More POOR RATE 3/4d. in the £ and almost daily meetings of workers and SHOPKEEPERS TO SEE WHAT TO DO. Burslem great agitation, MILITARY CALLED OUT.

[^2]: " 5. FREETRADE CONFERENCE [in] Sheffield. RE- VEREND W. Bailey: IT WAS NOT WORDS WHICH WOULD MOVE PARLIAMENT, BUT FORCE, a GENTLEMAN is reported to have spoken of Peel's assassination, etc. " 11. Villiers' MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF WHOLE HOUSE TO CONSIDER CORN LAWS rejected, 117:231.





**[p. 3]**

July 18.

August 1.

12. 15.

17.

18. 24.

September 5.

" 30.

October 6.

December 9.

" 31.

1843. January 9.

" 26.

February 11.

STRIKE of the COAL and IRON MINERS, Airdrie and Coatbridge, immediately followed by the Glaswegians, FOR ADVANCING WAGES. Ashton AND Oldham STRIKE—Manchester

RIOTS. Parliament closed. Delegate Trades Meeting [in] Man- chester— peaceful. Proclamation by the Chartist NATIONAL EXECUTIVE (in contrast)—warlike.

" T H E PACIFICATION OF THE NORTH ISCOMPLETED." White (George) in Birmingham despite the police, despite warrant goes with guard to meetings and speaks. York AND Lancaster SPECIAL ASSIZES, some 156 RIOTERS TRIED.

[^1]: Stafford SPECIAL ASSIZES FOR RIOTERS. F. O'Connor arrested FOR EXCITING TO SEDITION in Manchester, etc., at meetings in August. Cobden announces at Manchester meet- ing that the League intends to raise £50,000. T h e quaint city COMMON COUNCIL votes for

[^2]: FREE TRADE IN CORN.

[^3]: REVENUE FOR QUARTER SHOWS DECREASE £940,062.

[^4]: O'Connell announces REPEAL481 for this year—hence renewed agitation.

[^5]: ANTI-CORN LAW WEEKLY MEETING, Wilson an- nounces renewed agitation, 400,000

[^6]: TRACTS SENT OUT LAST WEEK, TONS MORE TO-

[^7]: MORROW. Parliament opened.





**[p. 573]**

23.

March 1.

15.

/larch 24,

>> 31,

April 27,

May 9.

" 24.

June 8.

" 10.

" 15.

July 19.

" 25. August 15.

24.

n O W RESERVED ON POINT OF LAW. From today weekly MEETINGS of the ANTI- CORN LAW LEAGUE in Drury Lane T h e a t r e resumed.

FACTORY BILL READ 2ND TIME.482

Revenue a/c rising, but still below last year (EXCEPT NEW INCOME TAX). Irish Arms Bill,483 as many arms bought u p there. Villiers' CORN LAW Motion, after 5 evening debates, defeated 381:125. Peel declares that he intends to oppose REPEAL absolutely. Richard Arkwright's WILL PROVED— £8,000,000.

[^1]: MONSTER REPEAL MEETING [in] Kilkenny— 300,000 men. Rebecca RIOTS in Wales 4 8 4 BEGAN: ABOLITION

[^2]: OF TURNPIKES, OF TITHES AND COMMUTED RENT CHARGES, CHURCH RATE AND NEW POOR LAW. REPEAL MEETING [in] Ennis — 500,000 MEN. EDUCATIONAL CLAUSES 5 — I N FACT BILL ABAN- DONED on account of opposition of the DISSENTERS486 (petition over 2,000,000 sig- natures). (All REPEAL MAGISTRATES in Ireland dismissed u p to now.) Still over a week's debate Smith O'Brien's MOTION FOR INQUIRY INTO DISTRESS in Ireland defeated 243:164. Bright M.P. FOR Durham City. MONSTER REPEAL MEETING [at] T a r a Hill. Parliament closed.





**[p. 574]**

September 28.

October 1.

7.

10.

" 14.

" 21

" 23

" 26

November 8

1844. January 1

January 15.

February 1. " 6.

" 12.

p a y m e n t , CUTTING CROPS, etc.

ANTI-CORN-LAW a g i t a t i o n in L o n d o n r e - s u m e d with m e e t i n g in C o v e n t G a r d e n T h e a t r e . 9 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 TRACTS d i s t r i b u t e d i n p r e v i o u s y e a r .

REPEAL MONSTER MEETING in M u l l a g h m u s t .

[in] C l o n t a r f b a n n e d BY PROCLAMATION.

ROYAL COMMISSION TO INQUIRE INTO R e b e c c a CAUSES. O ' C o n n e l l a c c u s e d — s t i l l n o p o i n t f o r m u - lated, b u t QUIT UNDER BAIL TO APPEAR NEXT TERM

TO ANSWER ANY CHARGE BY ATTORNEY GENERAL.

A N T I - C O R N - L A W VICTORY AT CITY LONDON ELECTION: P a t t i s o n OVER B a r i n g .

COUNCIL AT HALL in D u b l i n o p e n e d . — O ' C o n n e l l n o w "PEACEFUL"!

TRIALS OF R e b e c c a — h e a v y s e n t e n c e s (Car- diff). O ' C o n n e l l finally c h a r g e d .

[^1]: 1845. J u n e 6.

[^2]: M a r q u i s [of] W e s t m i n s t e r goes o v e r t o

[^3]: t h e A N T I - C O R N LAW LEAGUE. M a n y A N T I -

[^4]: CORN LAW a n d PRO-CORN LAW MEETINGS h e l d t h r o u g h o u t t h e c o u n t r y . O ' C o n n e l l ' s TRIAL. S e n t e n c e d , c o n f i r m e d

[^5]: o n M a y 2 4 b y QUEENS BENCH. 4 8 12 MONTHS. P a r l i a m e n t o p e n e d .

[^6]: N e w FACTORY BILL ( n o t p a s s e d p r e v i o u s year).

[^7]: REVEREND O a s t l e r f r e e d after 3 years in d e b t o r s gaol.

[^8]: FACTORY A C T , LAW. Railway s p e c u l a t i o n a n d a u t u m n p o t a t o blight.

[^9]: J u l y ' 4 6 - F e b r u a r y ' 6 2 . Russell

[^10]: 1847. July 2 8 . Elections. F. O ' C o n n o r a n d W a l t e r elected in N o t t i n g h a m .





**[p. 575]**

December 7. F. O'Connor's motion to investigate how the Union with Ireland had been made and what it had achieved, 23:255.

1848. March 13. Chartist Demonstration [on] Kennington Common. Jones spoke forcefully. In Ire- land Young Ireland488 revolutionary, de- manding arms. At Trafalgar Square meeting, March 6, ostensibly about INCOME TAX, police knocked down, strengthened to 500 men, new ROW in the evening.—On the 6th RIOT in Glasgow by UNEMPLOYED, some looting, military called out, but the mass dispersed without shooting. Similar in Edinburgh and Liverpool. April 1. RIFLE CLUBS formed in Ireland. " 4. NATIONAL CHARTIST CONVENTION in London, demonstration for the 10th. E. Jones for FIGHTING. B. O'Brien for waiting until the people stronger than the law. " 6. F. O'Connor's motion to pardon Frost, Williams and Jones defeated 91:23. " 7. A GAGGING ACT489 against inflammatory speeches introduced by Grey. " 10. Kennington Common. The Chartists in processions to Kennington Common to assemble there and thence on to the HOUSE OF COMMONS with the MONSTER petition. 250,000 SPECIAL CONSTABLES.—4,300 soldiers to Kennington.— On Saturday evening SPLIT over arming: B. O'Brien for, F. O'Connor against. B. O'Brien withdraws with his LOT. The demonstration fell FLAT, the march to Westminster abandoned, and F. O'Connor handed over the peti- tion that evening in the usual way. " 13. Debate on the petition, instead of 5,706,000 signatures, said to be only 1,975,496, including much nonsense. May 16. CHARTIST NATIONAL CONVENTION BREAKS UP. " 27. John Mitchel 14 YEARS TRANSPORTATION.— RIOTS in Clarkenwell Green and Bethnal



**[p. 2]**

Green, nothing significant, because of this CONVICTION of Chartists and Re- pealers.490

J u n e GOLD EXCITEMENT IN CALIFORNIA.

" 6. Jones and 3 others COMMITTED FOR SEDITION. " " O'Connell's REPEAL ASSOCIATION BROKEN UP. " 11. Great precautions in London against Chartist insurrection: bank, mint, govern- ment offices, Thames steamers full of soldiers. Parliament moreover pro- visioned. " 12. Chartist demonstration a failure it seems, very pitiful. June. Insurrection.3

July 7. Jones and 5 others 2 years and BOUND OVER

AFTERWARDS. " 22. Russell demands suspension OF habeas corpus 4 9 1 in Ireland, BILL introduced. " 25. Smith O'Brien's attempt at insurrec- tion.— [On the] 29th Smith O'Brien ap- prehended. August 8. Berkeley's BALLOT MOTION CARRIED AGAINST GOVERNMENT 86:81. " 14. Chartists' rising [in] Ashton under Lyne. MIDNIGHT ATTACK AGAINST TOWN HALL with pistols and lances—one POLICEMAN shot— broken up. " 15. 14 Chartist leaders arrested in Manches- ter for INCITING TO RISE IN ARMS. " 16. 18 Chartist leaders arrested in London, Orange Street, armed; others in Moor Street. Allegedly they were d u e to strike during the night. Lot of ammunition seized. " 25. TRIAL of the L o n d o n Chartists, 26th, TRIAL of Manchester Chartists. Condemned to

[^1]: YEARS HARD LABOUR. " 26. TRIAL of those arrested on August 16 in London—TRANSPORTATION FOR LIFE.

[^2]: a Of the Paris workers on June 22-25, 1848.— Ed.





**[p. 577]**

1852. June 8. F. O'Connor gets up to silly tricks in HOUSE OF COMMONS, arrested by SERGEANT AT ARMS, taken to madhouse.

1855. August 30.

1856. May 3.

t F. O'Connor in Notting Hill.

Amnesty for Frost, Williams and Jones and the other transported Irish pris- oners.

1869. January 26.

Written in August 1886

t Ernest Jones, 50.

First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

