---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "5. Plan of Chapter Four of the Pamphlet The Role of Force in History "
Page_Range: "607-608"
---

# 5. Plan of Chapter Four of the Pamphlet The Role of Force in History 



**[p. 578]**

[PLAN OF CHAPTER FOUR OF THE PAMPHLET THE ROLE OF FORCE IN HISTORY]

1. 1848. Postulate of national states. Italy, Germany, Poland, Hungary. 2. Bonaparte's enlightened policy of conquest: nationhood in exchange for compensation. Italy. 3. Against this, [Prussian] army reorganisation. Conflict. Bismarck. Policy not original. 4. Position in Germany. Unity: 1. through revolution, 2. through Austria, 3. through Prussia (Customs' Union). 5. War [of] 1864 and 1866. Revolutionary means. 6. Bismarck's best years—until 1870. 7. French War.3 Empire. Annexation of Alsace-Lorraine. Russia the arbitrator. 8. Bismarck at the end—turns reactionary, feeble-minded. Kultur- kampf492 (civil marriage). Protective tariffs and agrarian alliance with bourgeois.—Colonial swindles. Slandering of Bismarck.— Anti-Socialist Law.493—Suppression of coalition.—Social re- form.— Militarism because of annexation of Alsace.—The Junker [in Bismarck] comes to the fore for the lack of other ideas.

[^1]: Written between the end of 1887 and Printed according to the manu- March 1888 script

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Published in English for the first Archives, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 time

[^3]: a This point also includes the notes written on the same sheet and crossed out by Engels presumably after he had used them in his work, " 1 . Methods of warfare. Contribution, franc-tireurs, [Thefts of] clock, thrashing. Severity of Junkers' revenge from above. 2. Overthrow of the Empire. 3. Hats off to Paris! 4. Milliards and Alsace-Lorraine."— Ed.



