---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "6. Plan of the Final Section of Chapter Four of the Pamphlet The Role of Force in History "
Page_Range: "608-610"
---

# 6. Plan of the Final Section of Chapter Four of the Pamphlet The Role of Force in History 



**[p. 579]**

PLAN OF THE FINAL SECTION OF CHAPTER* FOUR OF THE PAMPHLET

THE ROLE OF FORCE IN HISTORY

I. 3 classes: two lousy, one of them decaying, the other on the ascent, and workers who only want bourgeois FAIR PLAY. Manoeuvring between the latter two therefore the only proper way—perish the thought! Policy: To strengthen state power in general and to make it financially independent in particular (nationalisation of the railways, monopolies), police state and regional principles of justice.

"Liberal" and "National", the dual nature of 1848, still in evidence in Germany of 1870-88.

Bismarck had to rely on the Reichstag and the people, and this called for complete freedom of the press, speech, association and assembly, just for orientation. II. 1. Structure [of the a) Economic—ill-conceived curren- Empire] cy law main achievement already, b) Political—restoration of the police state, and anti-bourgeois judicial laws (1876), poor copy of the French version.— Legal un- certainty.—Culminated in the Imperial Court. 1879. 2. Lack of ideas a) Kulturkampf. The Catholic proved by playing priest is no gendarme or police- around and slan- man. Jubilation by the bour- dering Bismarck. geoisie—hopelessness—going to Bismarck's party Canossa.494 Only rational result— sans phrase. civil marriage!

[^1]: 3 ' > - 1 2 ,J,





**[p. 580]**

a) Protective tariffs, etc., coalition of bourgeois and Junkers, with the latter taking the lion's share. b) Attempts at a tobacco monopoly defeated in 1882. c) Colonial swindles. 5. Social policy a la a) Anti-Socialist Law and crushing Bonaparte. of workers' associations and funds, b) Social reform crap. III. 6. Foreign policy. Threat of war, effect of annexation.

Increase in strength of army. Septennate.495 In due course, a return to the pre-1870 year group to maintain superiority for a few more years. IV. Result: a) A domestic situation which collapses with the

death of those two3: no empire without emperor! Proletariat driven to revolution; an unpre- cedented growth in social-democracy on the repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law—chaos, b) Overall outcome—a peace worse than war at best; or else a world war.

[^1]: Written between late December 1887 and Printed according to the manu- March 1888 script

[^2]: First published in Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 1, Published in English for the first No. 26, 1895-96 time

[^3]: a Bismarck and William I.— Ed.



