---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "5. To the Editors of the New Yorker Volkszeitung "
Page_Range: "646-648"
---

# 5. To the Editors of the New Yorker Volkszeitung 



**[p. 617]**

TO THE EDITORS OF THE NEW YORKER VOLKSZEITUNG5

In your article concerning me a in the Volkszeitung of March 2 b

you maintain

"that Aveling is said to have submitted a bill which contained items that a labour agitator, who must know that the donations0 raised to finance agitation come almost entirely out of the pockets of hard-working labourers, really should not present".

Passing over all the minor points and restricting my reply to the one main point, I wish to state:

The weekly bills submitted by me to the Executive contained all my expenses, that is to say both those chargeable to the Party and others to be met by me personally. I had made it clear to the Executive in advance and in the most unambiguous way—first in a verbal agreement with the treasurer, R. Meyer, and then in several letters—that all the purely personal expenses were to be defrayed by me in return for the $366.00 ($3 per day) guaranteed to me by the Executive, and that I left it entirely up to the Executive to decide which items of expenditure should be passed on to the party, and which items should be charged to me personally.

I never expected—even less demanded—that any of these personal items of expenditure should be paid for "out of the pockets of hard-working labourers", and indeed none of them have been. For further information about this I refer you to my

[^1]: a Edward Aveling, on behalf of whom this letter was written.— Ed. b "Affaire Aveling noch einmal", New Yorker Volkszeitung, No. 52, March 2, 1887.— Ed.

[^2]: c The New Yorker Volkszeitung has "money".— Ed.





**[p. 618]**

In addition I would point out that a printing error has crept into your article. My reply to your article of January 12a was dated not "Feb. 1887" but January 26, 1887, and was sent off to you on the same day that article came to my notice.

With social-democratic greetings.b

Edward Aveling London, March 16, 1887

First published in the New Yorker Volks- Printed according to the manu- zeitung, No. 76, March 30, 1887 scrpit collated with the newspaper text

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a "Aveling und die Sozialisten", New Yorker Volkszeitung, No. 10, January 12, 1887.— Ed.

[^2]: b This phrase is omitted in the text published in the newspaper.— Ed.



