---
Volume: 26
Document_Title: "6. Engels' Amendments to the Programme of the North of England Socialist Federation "
Page_Range: "648-652"
---

# 6. Engels' Amendments to the Programme of the North of England Socialist Federation 



**[p. 619]**

ENGELS' AMENDMENTS TO THE PROGRAMME OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND

SOCIALIST FEDERATION516

Wage-workers of all Countries—Unite!

THE NORTH OF ENGLAND SOCIALIST FEDERATION

(FOUNDED IN NORTHUMBERLAND, MAY, 1887)

PRINCIPLES3

The North of England Socialist Federation has been formed to educate and organize the people to achieve the economic emancipation of labour.

While fully sympathising with and helping every effort of the wage-earners to win better conditions of life under the present system, the Socialist Federation aims at abolishing the Capitalist and Landlord class, as well as the wage-working class, and forming // the workers of society // all members of society into a Co-operative Commonwealth.

An employing class monopolising all the means of getting and making wealth, and a wage-earning class compelled to work //primarily// for the profit of these employers, is a system of tyranny and slavery.

The antagonism of these two classes //brings about// manifests itself in fierce competition — for employment amongst the workers and for markets amongst the capitalists. This //gives rise to class hatred and class strife // divides the nation against itself, forms it into two hostile camps, and destroys real independence, liberty, and happiness.

The present system gives ease and luxury to the idlers, toil and poverty to the workers, and degradation to all; it is essentially unjust and should be abolished. And it can be abolished, now that the productiveness of labour has become so vast that no extension of markets can absorb its overflowing produce, the very superabundance of the means

[^1]: a The words crossed out by Engels are given in double oblique lines, and the text added by him is printed in italics.— Ed.





**[p. 620]**

of life and of enjoyment thus becoming the cause of stagnation of trade, want of employment and consequent misery of the toiling millions.

Our aim is to bring about a Socialist System which will give healthy and useful labour to all, ample wealth and leisure to all, and the truest and fullest freedom to all.

All are invited to help the Socialist Federation in this great cause. Adherents shall acknowledge truth, justice, and morality as the basis of their conduct towards each other and towards all men. They shall acknowledge no rights without duties: no duties without rights.

Written between June 14 and 23, 1887 Reproduced from the Principles with amendments in Engels' hand First published in: Marx and Engels,

Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XVI, Published in English for the first Part 1, Moscow, 1937 time

Wage-workits of all Countries—Unite !

THE NORTH OF ENGLAND SOCIALIST FEDERATION.

(FOUNDED IN tfoh Tui:Mit KKi.ANi>, MAY, 1887.)

PRINCIPLES. Tho North of England Socialist Federation ha« been formed to educate and organize the people to achieve tbo economic émancipa lit m of labour.

While fully Sympathien g with ami ht-lping t-verv «'ffort of tho wage -earner* to win hotter conditions of life under the pn-m-m *>*U'in, tht* Styiajfot_fr>fl fr » - tioa aims at ahuliiihiug tho Capital^t and landlord classjaiid ïurm Uig£ïW worktrajof toriety into a Co-operative Coium« »wealth.

An i ï»plo> mg cla-a in<m<>ifol Mi)£all the nu*an* of getting and making wealth; and a wuyti^iimiiu: das* compelled lo work^rimarilv for the profit of these employers, is a stt-toui if t.irunny and shivery. _____„_„.. Th« antagonism of the*e two ela-.rtes|brinns ahottgn Vree competition—for einphnmeut am-ug-t the work<-rd ami for înirktits amount the capitalist*. Thistgivt:« r:^,j to eis^ hatred »uni class strife aad destroys r*al iudependg] liberty, and happiness. ^—-- Thc presfttit vj«feni KIT«* ease and luxury to Ihe idlfcrs, toil aud jioverty to tho «.irkt-ra, ami drgriul itwa to all ; it ia essentially nujaat and should J» . abolished. ——————~

•~/v

\

[^1]: Oar HI n in to bring about a Socialist System which will Rive healthy and useful labour to all, ample wealth and leisure to all, and the truest and fulleat freedom to all.

[^2]: AH are hotted to help tho Botialiat Federation in this great cane«. Ad- here nu shall acknowledge truth, jtwttce, and morality a« the basis of their conduct to ward d each other and towards all men. Th« y abult acknowledge KO mania WITHOUT DCTLKO: WO PUTU*» WITHOUT BIGHT**.

[^3]: PROGRAMME.

[^4]: The Socialist Federation seek« to gain it» cuds by working on the following lines:—

[^5]: (1) Forming and helping other Socialist bodies to form a Nntioual and

[^6]: International ttocialibt Labour Party. (2) Strivitigto eonqner political po»erb\ promoting the elwtiou of Hoeiali H»

[^7]: to Parliament, Local government«, School lloatds, ami other ad- ministrative bodies. (3) Htlping Trade Unionism, Co-operation, and every genuine movement

[^8]: for the good of the worker*. (4) Promoting a scheme for the National and International Federation at

[^9]: Labour.

[^10]: AU who agree with tbese objects are invited to become members. For Kulcs sei1 otber bkle.

[^11]: Programme of the North of England Socialist Federation with Engels' amendments





