---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "9. The March Association "
Page_Range: "67-69"
---

# 9. The March Association 



**[p. 36]**

THE MARCH ASSOCIATION

Cologne, March 10. The Frankfurt so-called "March Association"29

of the Frankfurt so-called "Imperial Assembly"30 has had the insolence to send us the following lithographed letter:

"The March Association has decided to compile a list of all newspapers which have given us space in their columns and to distribute it to all associations with which we are connected in order that with the assistance of these associations the newspapers indicated will be given preference in being supplied with any relevant announcements.

In the enclosed list of newspapers which "have given space in their columns to the March Association" and to which the supporters of the "March Association" should give preference in supplying "relevant announcements", one finds also the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which, in addition, is given the honour of an asterisk.

We hereby announce to all the left-handed and the extreme left-handed members31 of this so-called "March Association" of the ci-devant "Imperial Assembly" that the Neue Rheinische Zeitung has never consented to become the organ of a parliamentary party, least of all of a party of the comical Frankfurt imperial club, that our newspaper has never given space in its columns to the so-called

[^1]: "In informing you herewith of this list, we believe it is unnecessary to draw your attention to the importance of the paid 'announcements' of a newspaper as a source of income for the whole enterprise.

[^2]: "Further, the Central March Association has decided to recommend the associations to favour with their support the Teutsches Volksblatt, a democratic- constitutional newspaper appearing in Würzburg, edited by Dr. Eisenmann, in view of the fact that this newspaper is under the threat of succumbing to the competition of anti-democratic newspapers, and the editor has stated that he is not in a position to make further sacrifices over and above those he has already made.

[^3]: Frankfurt, end of February 1849.

[^4]: The Managing Committee of the Central March Association"





**[p. 37]**

The reference of the "March Association" to our newspaper becomes still more ill-mannered owing to the "decision" of the Association to recommend the "democratic-constitutional" news- paper (the Germanic periodical: Teutsches Volksblatt) of "Dr. Eisenmann". Who would not be touched by the sad fate of the great "Germanic" primeval martyr Eisenmann? What upright man will not feel it as a blow that "Dr." Eisenmann, who sold his prison reminiscences to the "democratic-constitutional" King of Bavaria3

for 12,000 guldens, cannot make "further sacrifices" and is under the threat of succumbing to the publishing "competition" of the ordinary newspapers that are not imposed and that are against the "March Association"? We leave it to the patriots to calculate into what deep neglect the Teutsches Volksblatt must have fallen if

Eisenmann, the martyr with 12,000 guldens and deputy with a 5-taler salary, has to appeal for public "support". In any case, things must have gone badly, very badly, with the "democratic-constitu- tional" Eisenmanns if they produce a fictitious begging letter from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, the only newspaper in Germany which has always attacked the "shameless, mean beggars" from among the patriots and imperial-beggarly assemblies.

To the dirty remark of the profit-greedy competition-goaded patriots about "the importance of the paid announcements of a newspaper as a source of income for the whole enterprise", we, of course, do not reply. The Neue Rheinische Zeitunghas always differed from the patriots not only generally but also in that it has never regarded political movements as a territory for swindlers or a source of income.

[^1]: Written by Marx on March 10, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische • Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 243, March 11, 1849 time

[^3]: a Maximilian II.— Ed.



