---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "19. The Censorship "
Page_Range: "101-103"
---

# 19. The Censorship 



**[p. 70]**

THE CENSORSHIP

Cologne, March 14. The German daily press is certainly the flabbiest, sleepiest and most cowardly institution under the sun! The greatest infamies can be perpetrated before its very eyes, even directed against itself, and it will remain silent and conceal everything; if the facts had not become known by accident, one would never have learnt through the press what splendid March violets have been brought into being by divine grace in some places.

Last autumn citizen and communist Drigalski63 tried to re- introduce censorship in Düsseldorf, on the pretext of the state of siege.3 The attempt succeeded for two days; but the storm it aroused in public opinion compelled the sabre-bearing gentlemen im- mediately to abandon their yearning for censorship.

For three months censorship has existed in all its glory in two different districts, but the entire old-Prussian press calmly passes over this scandalous encroachment on its rights!

Just listen to this:

Rosenberg, in Silesia, March 7. No. 19 of the Rosenberg-Kreuzburger Telegraph publishes the following statement at the top of the page.

[^1]: But what does the situation look like in the old provinces?64

[^2]: "We ask the readers of our newspaper not to blame us for the delay in the appearance of this issue and its incompleteness, but to take into account that we are still under the state of siege and that the Telegraph—which has recendy been under the censorship of the local royal district president, Herr Sack, who has been elected as a deputy to the Second Chamber—after his departure to Berlin has now been placed under direct military censorship.

[^3]: "The editorial board. "

[^4]: a See Marx, "Drigalski—Legislator, Citizen and Communist" (present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 75-80).— Ed.





**[p. 71]**

But that is not all: censorship is introduced also for newspapers and other publications printed abroad, i.e. outside the area under the state of siege. The Erfurter Adressblatt of February 7 contains the following announcement:

"On orders from the royal Commandant's office here, the Erfurt public is warned, on pain of 'appropriate police punishment' and 'immediate arrest', against the distribution or bill-posting of materials printed outside the town which cast suspicion on government measures or launch malicious attacks against them, and thereby have the effect of alienating the minds of the population from the existing constitutional government, or which tend to provoke animosity against specific classes of the population and, consequendy, unrest and friction in our town.

The restoration of censorship, and the replacement of ordinary by military censorship, are surely things which closely concern the press. Yet the press of neighbouring places—the press of Breslau, Berlin, Leipzig—accept all that as if it were a matter of course! In fact the German press is still the old "good press".

But we ask our somnolent deputies in Berlin: will they still fail to move that the Ministers be promptly brought to trial?

[^1]: Erfurt, February 5, 1849.

[^2]: The Municipal Administration, Police Department. "

[^3]: Written on March 14, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^4]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 246, March 15, 1849 time



