---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "24. The Frankfurt March Association and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "115-117"
---

# 24. The Frankfurt March Association and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 84]**

THE FRANKFURT MARCH ASSOCIATION AND THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, March 15. We are returning once more to the unfortu- nate March Association,3 this fitting offspring of the "March revolu- tion". We are being reproached "with harming the cause of free- dom" since we undermine the March Association. But did we not already in December 1848, to the horror of the Kölnische Zeitung, denounce the March Association as the unconscious tool of counter- revolution?79 Did we not, therefore, already long ago communicate to the "March Association" our opinion of the "March Association"? Were the March Association an organisation of a revolutionary party, were it even only a logical sound fruit of the March revolt, we would put up with such ineptitude as its speculation with announce- ments undoubtedly was. In the first place the March Association displays no activity unless perhaps the issuing of addresses ranks as such; further, the March Association is an optimistic simpleton between the constitutionalists (whom we regard as worse supporters of reaction than the club of the Knight von Radowitz80) and some really worthy democrats who have allowed their sight to be clouded by nebulous ideas of imperial conciliation. The majority in that central commercial association6 will always be governed by the indecision peculiar to it; the Association will perhaps stimulate dis- content among the people, but at the decisive moment it will betray them and subsequently bemoan its error. Well, may the commercial association fare well! Its sensitivity in other respects does not move us, and freedom of the press seems still to be understood by these

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 36-37.— Ed.

[^2]: A pun (Kommerz^commerce, März= March) referring to the leading forces of the Central March Association.— Ed.



Written by Marx on March 15, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 248, March 17, 1849 time

[^2]: a In Giessen.— Ed.



