---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "25. Draft Address of the Second Chamber "
Page_Range: "117-121"
---

# 25. Draft Address of the Second Chamber 



**[p. 86]**

[DRAFT ADDRESS OF THE SECOND CHAMBER]

Cologne, March 16. Below we give for the information of our readers the draft Address of the Second Chamber,84 a pale, servile copy of the speech from the throne.3 Its author is the notorious knight of the red land,b valiant (!) von Vincke.

The Commission that drafted the Address

"gratefully recognised' (Old-Testament style) "the establishment" of "legal order through the Constitution of December 5 of last year".

The Commission even expresses this gratitude in the name of the "Prussian people". And why should, according to the Commission, the people be thankful for the December Constitution imposed by the sabre? Because it is "imbued with a longing for the restoration of public legal order'7. Unfortunate knight Vincke! He has had to prove that he is the champion of the " legal basis", which is his speciality. But how is it possible to recognise the "legal basis" when confronted with the Brandenburg Government which shattered this very basis of legality by tearing up the laws of April 6 and 8, 184886? Nothing is simpler! The Government has imposed a new legal basis, martial law and simultaneously the Charter, the Code and philosophy of martial law—the Constitution of December 5. First the Government abolishes "public legal order". Then the Government proclaims some other "public legal order", the first that comes to hand, e. g. a Croatian one, a legal basis of quelconque.0 Then the Commission for drafting the Address in the name of the Prussian people, and Vincke

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 445-50.— Ed. b Westphalia.— Ed.

[^2]: c Any kind.— Ed.





**[p. 87]**

The Address Commission and the dead ride fast.3 First of all, "gratitude" (according to the prescription of the Neue Preussische Zeitung) for the coup d'état of December 5! Then the martial-law Constitution as the "henceforth valid fundamental law of the Prussian state"! Finally, the vow to carry out the "revision wholly inspired by reverence and loyalty towards Your Royal Majesty", i.e. a revision in the sense desired by the donor. In this way, it is to be hoped, we shall be led back to the period even prior to the United Diet88!

As for Berlin's "state of siege", the Address Commission will be governed exclusively by the platitude that "true freedom cannot exist without law and order". People know the batde-cry of "law and order!" from the events in Warsaw.89 If only Prussia could exist without money or obtain money without these importunate par- liamentary chatterers! As for the states of siege sporadically occurring "outside the city of Berlin", the Address Commission considers it appropriate "to await a further report from Your Royal Majesty's Government". Meanwhile Erfurt and the districts of Silesia where a state of siege has been declared are left out in the cold. Vincke is satisfait as long as the Erfurt and Rosenberg military censorships5 do not "cross out" his draft Address. There is no danger of that!

Vincke then makes a promise in the name of the Address Commission, and the commission makes a promise in the name of the Second Chamber, and the Second Chamber makes a promise in the name of the people to fulfil "by strenuous effort" and as satisfactorily as possible the tasks which the royal Prussian Govern- ment has entrusted to the "so-called representation of the people". Good luck!

[^1]: "We too recognise with joy that the Prussian army has proved its military renown during the days of struggle and its loyalty in the course of severe trials."

[^2]: a "The dead ride fast" from G. A. Bürger, Lenore.—Ed. b See this volume, pp. 70-71.— Ed.





**[p. 88]**

And the German question?

"Prussia" will shrink from "no sacrifice" in order to seize Little Germany,0 by means other than those with which Frederick the Great seized Silesia. In regard to "conquests", modern Prussia subscribes to the principle of "peaceful" progress. Moreover, the Address Commission "hopes" that "all the German governments will come to an understanding with the German National Assembly". We hope that the German governments will not pay much attention to this imperial training-college for teachers.

The Address Commission further expresses the wish that there be "no disturbance of the peace" as a result of "the termination of the armistice by the Danish King". Vincke knows very well that this Danish termination of the armistice is not meant to be taken more seriously than the Prussian-Danish war itself.92 The Prussian troops act as imperial troops in Schleswig-Holstein, the Schleswig-Holstein troops act as imperial troops in South Germany, the former here and the latter there declaring martial law!

Condolences for the death of Prince Waldemar, and assurances of readiness for self-sacrifice, by means of which von Bodelschwingh,

Riedel, von Seckendorf, Arnim, Harkort, Count Renard, Camp- hausen, Vincke, Grün and suchlike rabble stoop to the role of Prussian Lycurguses and Solons; piety, respect for the law, public spirit, justice, providence, the hearts of the kings and the future of Prussia, "and with it the future of Germany",—all that is served up as a dessert by the Address Commission through the good offices of von Vincke!

[^1]: See Marx, "The Hohenzollern General Plan of Reform" (this volume, pp. 65-69).— Ed.

[^2]: i.e. the whole of Germany apart from Austria.— Ed.





**[p. 89]**

Written by Engels on March 16, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 247, time March 16, 1849

