---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "35. From the Theatre of War "
Page_Range: "154-156"
---

# 35. From the Theatre of War 



**[p. 123]**

FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR

Since the failure of the second attempt of the imperial forces to cross the Theiss, military operations have again come to a halt. Windischgrätz is in Ofen, ostensibly to settle administrative matters; Schlick and Jellachich have held a council of war with him, at which the plan of operations was substantially changed. Schlick remains in command of the army of the North; Jellachich, having vainly sought for months to effect a crossing of the Theiss at Szolnok, will now give this up altogether and move southwards to Theresiopel, to unite his forces with the Serbs and border troops stationed at Szegedin, and will probably try to capture Szegedin, in order then to cross the Theiss there and operate on its left bank against Debreczin. The Magyars will know how to give him an appropriate welcome. It is questionable whether he will succeed in persuading the Serbian

Landsturm, which constitutes the bulk of the troops stationed there, to join his army.

In the Banat of Temesvar, all is quiet. The Serbs, whose awareness of Austria's perfidy, by which they were duped, is growing daily, are not attacking anywhere. But without them, the imperial troops stationed there can do nothing. The Südslavische Zeitung reports from there:

[^1]: "At Alt-Arad, the insurgents have once again concentrated a considerable body of troops under the command of the insurgent General Damjanich (previously a captain in the Rukavina regiment), General Vetter (previously a major in the Don Miguel regiment) and Colonel Gaal (a pensioned-off royal imperial Lieutenant-Colonel), who is leading the siege of the fortress."3

[^2]: a Constitutionelles Blatt aus Böhmen No. 65, March 17, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 124]**

In Transylvania, a French officer is said to have assumed command during Bern's illness. The operations at Szolnok are also said to have been directed by a Frenchman named Duchatel.

We shall return in more detail3 to the Slav "troubles", which are taking an ever more edifying turn.

Written by Engels about March 21, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 252, March 22, 1849 time

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 133 and 162.— Ed.



