---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "I "
Page_Range: "228-236"
---

# I 



**[p. 197]**

WAGE LABOUR AND CAPITAL1

[I]

[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 264, April 5, 1849]

Cologne, April 4.a From various quarters we have been reproached with not having presented the economic relations which constitute the material foundation of the present class struggles and national struggles. We have designedly touched upon these relations only where they directly forced themselves to the front in political conflicts.

The point was, above all, to trace the class struggle in current history, and to prove empirically by means of the historical material already at hand and which is being newly created daily, that, with the subjugation of- the working class, the class which had made Febru- ary and March, its opponents were simultaneously defeated—the bourgeois republicans in France and the bourgeois and peasant classes which were fighting feudal absolutism throughout the continent of Europe; that the victory of the "respectable republic" in France was at the same time the downfall of the nations that had responded to the February revolution by heroic wars of indepen- dence; finally, that Europe, with the defeat of the revolutionary work- ers, had relapsed into its old double slavery, the Anglo-Russian slavery. The June struggle in Paris, the fall of Vienna, the tragi- comedy of Berlin's November,b the desperate exertions of Poland, Italy and Hungary, the starving of Ireland into submission184— these were the concentrated expressions of the European class struggle between bourgeoisie and working class, by means of which we proved that every revolutionary upheaval, however remote from the class struggle its goal may appear to be, must fail

[^1]: a In separate editions of Wage Labour and Capital, including that of 1891, the dates printed at the beginning of each article are omitted.— Ed.

[^2]: b In the 1891 edition "1848" is added here.— Ed.





**[p. 198]**

Now, after our readers have seen the class struggle develop in colossal political forms in 1848, the time has come to deal more closely with the economic relations themselves on which the existence of the bourgeoisie and its class rule, as well as the slavery of the workers, are founded.

We shall present in three large sections: 1) the relation of wage labour to capital, the slavery of the worker, the domination of the capitalist; 2) the inevitable destruction of the middle bourgeois classes and of the peasant estate0 under the present system; 3) the commercial subjugation and exploitation of the bourgeois classes of the various European nations by the despot of the world market—England.

We shall try to make our presentation as simple and popular as possible and shall not presuppose even the most elementary notions of political economy. We wish to be understood by the workers. Moreover, the most remarkable ignorance and confusion of ideas prevails in Germany in regard to the simplest economic relations, from the accredited defenders of the existing state of things down to the socialist miracle workers and the unrecognised political geniuses in which fragmented Germany is even richer than in sovereign princes.

Now, therefore, for the first question: What are wages? How are they determined?

If workers were asked: "How much are your wages?" one would reply: "I get a francb a day from my bourgeois"; another, "I get two francs", and so on. According to the different trades to which they belong, they would mention different sums of money which they receive from their respective bourgeois for a particular labour time orc for the performance of a particular piece of work, for example,

[^1]: a The 1891 edition has "the so-called burgher estate" instead of "the peasant estate".— Ed.

[^2]: b 1 franc equals 8 Prussian silver groschen. (In the 1891 edition the word "mark" is used everywhere instead of "franc".)—Ed.

[^3]: c The words "for a particular labour time or" are omitted in the 1891 edition.— Ed



JV M4. AMil, •o"ntrfl«g. im 9. 'April 1640.

{xm. <B«rtra »or N na afllra.»51«lt (t 9(ra. 163 «aagrgattil-

• . . I . t f t * ! .

f>«ait«laal. M i t . («abatra*: aal Jaai NI- - im W*V** • ' • • li«k. 1 t * • « « * " ] . - « a l « » « » M « I n n k f K ) . • « » « . » t a u «ah«..!*«.), atelia. < • * • * . • » » • . « « ta ..».. 8.<X " - Xaaa N*aaaltta B>»H «an ba M A h Ibt.a»\ ft««»'

Mn..

a.Ml.la>M»l»a>a «Mi

n f i t 4 n t M»|t- (EK. nl Ti(*t« Sratar* (4WM*at«M««fii) tjanf. (3|MTt>aat..i. - !

3>c Mtrlaabitf *BB.*BB - M M 3Mi Mii«Wa. - Krw tiaanait ia <

fa%«Ma).

l.> a. (I.|tlataa«,.). a < n (Ait e*Mki«ta a

* B ö i a , i . «aiil. t « a «rrla)i»it Bt B t5ritta aatf M l ta« > a<| . i t 1 * 1 w t l . a . . i ( 4 . a S . . . i l e a , | | . lata.!- Ira Di taira, sala). lit a a t r m l t «ttuafagt I n jifiara fltff.a. taatli aa> Kaliaaal Matft W a n . S i r tat.a N a B a a H • « * Siraali Bi|. aa. M h i a t a l , n I I M • aahlifa)«. tafctaara aaajrfl.lla. «afftraaa.ta.

Ca galt aai a Saaj Ita ffafrataai Bf ia »at taartftfftiarr. M B.rfalii B, a t u t n i taraaaa.ua M l tislia) aai «tfajaft Bra •if«i4ttia).a «Slaf. >at<rtfa) aaa)|aatifia. t a | a « H t Ua- ltti<a)aat, t r . lratitriftaft, aria). J.attat BBb H i t ) |raaa)l »all., «ltia>|rlri« i t » • > » » " Battit aarlta — Ma Saata/aa«- .riabli.a Br. ia fraaftria). >i> bra f.abalra IMala Maa« W a a . afrabaa t a r f f l . aal «Jaarrafiafra aaf I r a arlaaa Ma timta V |a>a t a a l m a l , t a t >»i « » J K t ! • • • « « • * . » a a M in l.aaa. t.ia) alrta),.«)!« Wr 3a B aai ftaliaara » a t , kit aaf a * gtataaf ita Bkuta* Mit attatta V« UBa BBtt,ialail<frirara |taarattttt lama, aaf (allia) Sanaa aal alt ttfiraaag br. mal Bti Bairr B «ttfftrr ia h.a. alia B a w l f f l « » " ' ' l«i««f*tl. •• a» t a g l i f * - t a f l i - I * . t WIatmi. V « 3aai(aa»f ta f a n d , br« Aaa S i t a « , ba ftafilaaaai. t H a Vrliarr «tarait»«, alt arriaaftitra l a t r r a . •taara falta«, 3lalirat aal Uajara«, 3 « " ! « »altaainaaa — tat att.a bit t Mat.aaa.Btf, I I atata lia) Iff raiaaatftt P& ftalaatf («iléta « t a t » . « « , aat nranl.ifla). ,tla»a»a|a H<, aa t.a.a sir aaa)*i.f.a, Ui ita. tltal Mita^i. tfiaftwa, a t f .>. 3 « ! aaa) ft f n a l « i t i l Ma. » l a « t l l a » | l W.ia.a , fetinta ma|, M IÙ ittalaliaaiit « . M . n r l . | . f i . j i . I a | j . t t waltlt H.|am .la. Ul W> Mnal, M ha twl.'anla). Un Ualita art t.. |.aaall«||a)t i t M l l t t l l b l a i a f t ) > • > » • B . l l l t i t J aj« hie Sa Nta «.ffra. 3a u f r m C t r l t l a t l . »at i l l i t Snflia V l.ir, *a..a e . l a i . a a l l tit C a ) » . ! ) ttasiraan(a> rtnilal»> •Ul.at laianl Jati ta Mai flatta M a n i a ) « la Wtaa , Ut tlaa a«. naftrfa Ht Wt W.|rtl"a)ta Dtaaa Kai., bat aaltr. art 9 a * »i-ilaal I « tara/rlia Va » t t a a i a , l . i t t l è i - . l . a , >u M a » kilara. tbtafa aaaltia«bi tta *tm tiafffafaarif u fna, via M a act tafaaiifa).B flttalatia B.

I t K a a a j a a n l

if aaataa ..»••« »r

km M » M i ltani«i W-»Ji. e»t I f M H U I « « Mi « « M M •M » K « - * * < * * Mf ntw b MMNi ¥i*f.U|ftt * f fé> «itw H Ifl Htt Mufni H H»li.

»•»»»w.t l i t ft *!(• »tt X.MI nk «d». Vif « A • • » • M «M tt Hf Ififfii. » i tarit Ota M M M M , M>B1I l u *<i lit Mit (rfaoti «M, r " " " jodti *»CT Hty*» (tot a*»*it pi

Wt 3 THurt 3t Mr». Sit ? Jt*f(*. fia* Nt Vttii Hi (Mlltaak Ala Xr Ml «M «mit tf am ttot «t M'l, a i « M I M . ••** * • * « a U ktt i«a«t. U t nftt »41 M M all h«t Ut)t am Mi aa»ttt •it I n tta*. 3»i« «aatf. fe lt Wil. M.y Va Mt Xitfti HT t*¥* Ml » a « ! M Aaptiaxftn a M M »aa Ok M, art | M if HMlit Mrfet lat Mal* to - " a Mi.>---ta «tti Antl. « • awl ftt M h K fa airi k|Mt. f * nii«f*t<4 Sttta a J-aaia. UM i J frta O. M « fr a4* a * aakttta Saatta *»t, Wt itff lat 1 Kraa M faafta haat > Mr S*ii |af «tt likti Kr atbin M Vaatt, M trtni, atara aaartt Maara aln an •utaiit.14. >•! i a n ia n « * Wtiaiaiita 9><l)iiia4. 3a»ta. Mi jtaft- uiii .h* i J I . M * »a», »at « it« U a.H Jirii«, ft ski Stn»«at, t* '•* •««•« twata I r M l t i ^ at««*««. mmz L

| (it likdt f W *

I r t d l . h i Ma y«*« Mt<ir rtatai H«1.4ta « a a n , Mi M M N I O I • W i m k». a U ww>»h»tt Stf.* t»a» «at. « M M <m nan Mit Hata «rtrim, i S. M M •<***. »<t Baac. «tail i Httti I M MB «rtta M w» »al «an. -Ptt^y^w fcy M aa»

M M Bha«aa» a « atifaafr M. |a W J » a u \ ï ~ 3 » • * • Ma ~ ' l a i M I l aa Mi Itiat Ma», «a Ma Mfraatt.

Kiel Ma«! ttaat ft htttf anttat iff, »at an ttt Mr ftv ta^faaf H. »ft >a»Ua U« ja Mt HMta 1*H alia rt W • « m , M IT M i M tmmaa» M M wir», faaam • ( ! aar. i «A». K • . ' • M l M » «jra a t * ta« «ra Mut »a« » r t « l • i t aaai Sawiaai« «rt Mtil ati Ma, fa Mai« f U» ,» Mt Santa,

ita* )••» « | • M fti IHM • a a n .

ttiata JMaf Iratt Hla M ate« aa« i Mf* Sntaaif Mta MWa«. f V it« 1 .f Hilai« iaai fl Uauti (.»r aati»ni»aft

Ma «V»« M»t« aa. C t Jt.it it «lit laaft w l

wi.' ti toil tim* «Mtta Stiii fttiu« titwnm Ma » »M Irtti Hiatiatoiai — Ma Mtfto U — Wt<( «Btotjofi fn M4*> a M M U T K.jjlfrl - M« «ata - aa* »a« Irtti Hiatiatoiai

(ttftl »it lût frtäatnaa Mt tniit MM aatljiat kt Mt, MJ«at Kt

t i a a i a t t a . i t Uftn.a «i»atl Maa aaa fmb« aaak aattf S ' * « , h i aa M-a « t , , « , « M I ita •t-ft M4"

« f ^ - t H i ; . . * ;

MUm, 4- »-hi. SI«Hff Mi »taifttrittt 180« - 140T MS ••t>ilt V * r a | n • « g*aa[li«n I r a l n M I i ^ m . (It ktxé* i^ck rt (a titf, aaf Wt Waali at »tr«W4e *••<#, S * « « { » M M ant M , M k n »<m**4M 6ta«t«Mt«>t Mri« riaig« Kffatat«' Htfttm** | t U N t — i«nt>wta \* téftm. 3a K » I M Mff^4(4t«t 9CTMM>n i. 1 . . « T k a a K t l l j i B i § r t i t - M * • 3 " - f t * " " M * «i*rt | t * a r t ( a a n t a « « , gér »ri 3 M ( I ' U M « | n^wltt* «it « i j r r t f f r t i t f t t . Crt>r bal» aa|tt ¥ic f-nfrf*« «MWrtttrf4afl, <»t wraa bi« f » f ( ( . i * t , »«Mafini twit^iil ) • f t t V « , a i l aaktia S art t a , tta^lat tlafn Ut («Mk Mf M aaf | a t i f « % Srt, • • h f t t ' H t M r f i ^ ta* fttbaf Witttrlt«, Mjtltfa MM*.

3*w Sttfthkwf «mi(t far»» Bfarrtiajta. t H* -Crhaitmt Maisrfit«, H'tft araig jraitbrrtt, ia » n t t a r i l •ft M « Dartf T» fftra Mr riaratfitta »er.kf.e,ta{4«ft<* dtf, » a titca 9«*l>a«4 » n f Vatiofi(tljtt Staolattoa aa«)c»(dfr*, t i S t - kra. IB«« a k r ••«) ait tar a i f n « ! ftrftta H.r V t-j« a i m * ' " XT - t o f r t a j f - grt« ( j , «<[«• nnb %a f at a (I« * • « • Mtakisn- fattiraoattlkrna I>ef(* At-ftftif/aa« »ft fftfcwj/tttéMgffit rrfaaott »rr Eaabaana »(of Xofjntrt : ) C«t M Iriibn b n f t n •<«>( at»t )Miaa«atirt u b f i t tw » f É m i t « J>t«**art» *•» Baama^tta ^taf fo aa» f» »irf 3 a | » Urn aa HMitm al« Da>fn>, finit. Mb e«attat-3aa«](ti «*m • U bit* t u t U t mb fli«b« »ttata; 3) ftiat tta WT tmtfiti, «tat baf rt ktt t r i a t M f »rt fjajbtflt« « t l l ^ t n t aa» b«t »a- f i t ! • tatnettatu t»tja»f aat. 5 M 15 tab at»f î b t l m »t> •Mtflt, tia l>«a»a«tt «Dtt tiat ft-rit Raaft Itntra, ft« ibfrtaatf •tan trlwrtlanf Mbfta, a«at »it sattbtqaabttra 9Taa»rt * M fa Mb f» titf V | w a »«fit | i »tja Kta ; 3) b « ïaabaam batf M (mattys, «hw mt§i R|i|« (frfaittit) u » Vtta»laa s brt » a t * - tmrn ; 4) n »«rflt »(ja* ««rtiagigr if rfaataif Mb »tat f» nib ft »ai t W " l»ias*8«rbn }• rattit^tn, ft« at« t t w s ©*ff ia I m k m , fa«j*r M nam «abtra trti« n » aa« artttt, »<aa'« tka M i r H c , àbtrfitbrfa. t)ir« « a m bit !>••*«•-.Iftrtaqtt« f#*fka-, »it M Jt«l«t U* ttiarailt M btr fta»,*fifikta M m t t 1606 Mb i Vrr f(âa|rabta S U f t n»tt bal »tfa Stfû>f traatia«' Urfym, Urn taakaaaa |a Zktil a a t » a .

3 » Utkti«ni fabr bit t»t> »ttmf^aft fort. nattr bra t i t t l • M »a**lb«»#ta, « n a W a f f i , «aabtaita, fflaiftgrvf«)», 3 t b f tta Mb btt vitl» «abtr/ftibafra 3l»«}ak» Mb t? ifhagta, »a« taabtatf aa« f t i f t » aa«|af«agta aab van kt» € * a * i f bt* M »ta frt» M m hit tirft « a « ! atyadnbra Rtiatii "ttajwrt tmti* m» ia Krtabta }• (tbra. t « Mît» iibtf i M)t tiaaaf »tin Ultra , fenbrn bit f t r t t t Kitttr ft***!«« ta« H I a» f«««t btwftftt Mitnita aa* btn it*

[^1]: D.ll7aaa)M» .aloa *.(tt Ira ! ! a * a l « " . f l a 3a«tt 1848 * tala Hah. Nta Sftta J t m r a M t Ba.afcla fajia, à) rt an Mr J . i . , aàat. h a i u r t r a aaf tat Maaaa-la)ta att MItaaft M M , •araaf >.r ü n t t a , tat Saatftaili. aal i t » (la Htatanfa)afl M araal«t. »at Ut «flaanrl art H.atilrr.

[^2]: S . t « t a r a ia lt.iaia»ra « W H a a » « a a t t t l t . : 1) » a « « t t . tâllai^ ttt e t t a a r B . i t , B R f a f i l a l , Ma a Sffaarm M i I t - »Mtta. lit »rrtf*a<t » n fa^lalu Va, J) l . a . . . . . . . i b i i . « t a U a i t t a a a a i n B . I . I . M I « a t ( t . l l a f t t n a a l 1 . 1 «•..•ai a.t.. i » )•»•.'• eta.-.aijbi. » . V . i ' V i ' . ' l ' l ' . f l î . ' ï . ' . ' t V . J â i . î . ' a ' . a t " a t . , . ! f a , . ' a * " « tara) Ira r-»tal.a It« S a t r M t M - a) »Ji. ajtratir antal Htfi »iaf-a) aal l a t a « . «••>-->-•- f - f - att f . l H bit H.«n«anf««<a » , , „ | , tn aa Mifa)ra Crlaaant aaajl aaaaaaf.i.a. S i . aal.a art «ra.atra arrftaa Maa) fata. tab -c»-a amfa» la P.ali4Iaab m »rrhaérai,!! Ut»t|™».a aal ». r.«a-^™Ma a a l t . l i . .ialaa)»aa Haaaa1i|a)ta a Vrtall- a * , aaa » a iiliali.lia «nltrilia.ia bar Mlttra Ma 3aféaat. lit fcaal , . . . . f o r i a d f l i f O j « * B » « » » » f o > a i f ' » " a B W a M r f a a a l n » o l i t l M w a • » « . « • . aa Mara la« |nf Bla- .ar» Sratf Waal aaa) rtia>t. .». a l t a a «aa Maaltr«

[^3]: 3aa4a)> . l i t |at r r M Jaajt » a » l # » . » » l a t t H . • • t a t » i t «air» a t a v r i l . « . . ?

[^4]: % ~ M . 1 . I K W naan. S i . H a ) K 3 1 . Iiküalatai la aat Ma «. aaiwara M- .M ntaiii I J.aai<-|lai Nafct Kia.a, ata at» a«a «aart Mlt.'- a v . 3 « l'»«ia 2 «Mai" a I « f W« Ma NM Nbl Mtaia K.Mituaaaaa. I n a B< *aart.iu. »a Ata fct aril«liliai » l a . hana.. a , . . I« • . fik «ai a.«ia-an >rbtii«r>i| aa,. M r j a * m »taa, I U v . « - . . . . « . . - , ,. « » . M » a « a — M l tea.

[^5]: • • I I

[^6]: t f * a i

[^7]: i « i a a

[^8]: t>* JIHtit * afa tiat Saa*«, W (*« «Hk«. »a « M J M M I « M »M a«»ti«l aa Uaft. Sataa a.tt««(t a | t t « a |a M » . « a Itarit < ahf att n t M (to«a«t Mitolril Ma It MUa«, Liât itatat

[^9]: Cc Ua M, a i M lit i i i | i | N t i » * a « a i l t i l ,a l-teta. ««iat Mta««

[^10]: • Oafn ( M M (ttftola «4t i | «tot « M i t . I

[^11]: I a « M M ia Ma t.Na «a, fct i l tl M « M i t . Mt it «a D M totttatt Man «Wtaih.i if »attr • M t W M vtwr Kan «Miia Wt. S M tt Hi M fn»t fttiwfti, « a t * tot M M , Mt a at*i, M * I » M «a», »w n «M Ma Sn«M}a*t |4l>C a Mji Mi falaf. Ma a »«M. MM a f h M k Ut maatitt i| talmilllt M, aa* «ti M, •!««, « r f a | hfea M f*t • * M f ia tla

[^12]: ia Jtapfaaiaai a M to oat tumw***. KM M r l r t t i m , lit I'J « I M M M an»i, tytoat, Kfeti, M»M, kaat, fa Viaftti, entât tiaafi. uaat a. I a. — «Ki ita Mt« lltteatft Si Ma, <aiaa>a, «»»in. finkta. Baan, »»ia>M, «ttia Ot^tn aw «tto Viaa« Mat« ht«.«, Aê (tvta. llafiakn. CM fcfca f«a«t ta faw («a aa, aa Mifc JMii«Uii aafaatt, aa « » * aaf Mt Sint M'MMal, Mi Vn L Bit Ht^atui Xtk n ta« I H M »M M« Im«« «taa a U Siiaa, »»fiiaaa. Batxn a f. a., fattm

[^13]: «Ml »rto*i- S I M I Mt Btt Maaara (Maat, aa fttat Utiftta« al* Maajt •a blftf R. (a atwi it ita att.il.t Mn« (H-arttitrt. Zk l>h.ii aat Mt JH it MMf nat « a a t t Dit ïrttit »a> ate>t taan - ~ " - ©a « n a a t M I I M 4 I M M Xit.it a i « j ait Mt Caw 1PM to Uwat* aa »ta • attfaaft. On fciaa a>tiaaai twatt Irtnt it ita fat aliaai mmmmm ••sss^sssm

[^14]: • 4 a «Ma liaat. On Mtttift M Ml Ma »«ta M« «ww» a M • « t ta^MM aataaft M (iitfj a M ( a n ftatat W.

[^15]: D i t 9tlt0ta»«it b«|a n«a» M «a« btr 9iafâkna«j ktr • • >

[^16]: #3« i Mftt btt 3"t>l»4»8 aibaantt, j«Wt* Ut tia»(i«)t î>ja». • n f n aa» Okatrktlrtiktatc fat ftia J>aabanf a^r 0»t(4-ift ri M |i»il«-K - btr Xt0tt aaa) lirafi«. »t»» - B t j . t , « . »ta aai»i«ra «artljnra. Dafmt gtaafj « »«a «ertl>tif, b«| i>a btr Va Mktrr «t«ta »it; ta Mfantii Sabt Ttr bfn«) fjtrfafjaag btr 0r- tiitkanf Mkalf («»(it, Mb »aft »ft » a W ^ m aaftibtai h i t(M •TWitta !a|ra Ba|it. e » MTt>lt M ' l MBtall M» M k t « «N(- Ina, «raatta, gfttftkm, eé)am»ca, f5àdtn, tttt Hr««- ( S t c W (wa«.) etftftta, ti4atra K.

[^17]: 3 « « kaata kit J>tma » i t t t bit Rrrtjlwil «f^alt, WI «af kit atatfit 3<it Utah, bar« ifert tig na« aok M r « trf Mftt %<• btra kta -Ra«ati« ftt)rta | i Malta, kaf kit tat jtat« foaab- a t r f t n Mb (ïtattkttrrtkfibrt |a |at>lta»ta KMatta aaf éraab •a» fd«kta taflttta n b aits)» arittr art tia «ta»9* « f t <|tt>- lia« ftita. € i t (watta aktt %è^ftn* tat btaitaigta Vta Ra 6é«k ia bit flajea f m r a , bit • « * bti t i a K a ) " Stt MItaiffn ia e « < f i / a fa aid aafjtta , aw bra «tiabt tat. btr Ä t r t r Val riatgra »taifti ^ t f t a , »it |a Aaafta ktr raa»ntttrli«ni l a M t feta Ota, f Mktra kit J>t Trra f^laarr S t i l t ttara* a t j t . atiata 9>raa»f«f u fa»ri}irta aa» »a fit »a i-aig Hr B Vaatt taaktt a i l jrata 6 4 t a f a [ , allottafifatr Xt^tttflaab |taaaat, n a m Cakrafal , b«4 Mwatlia) «af bta ?aa»*»lf ft Uiaan gt- laftt kal aab aa« f « | t t , a U alt aigyi Kifa Va Vaatela^ta jafaa« atagtaa Mata . (a «fan« rt i W t a , bta mtnlrti^ta Oma Kaj aaf kit aagt^tan Pttrrtwit ktr J i . t , aaf bit n D I « I »aftt, faitaâttt Bb aajaatabt«.

[^18]: Satjrn» btr •«aibiat* S>m ftàt 9iafàt)taag »ti Oltarrbtfni* Uit fl« t a a t i Mtl)t in iatafttittt «Spttalaiisata tialuf unk L. » . ttaffn. aa» S ^ b a - M ' a , (»let « a t r i f » ^ Caapfaa». Ita aaft||tt Mb aa)l »l«f ftia tigtat« rtrtttut, »a« fsafl ttt S a r f a M n »aa f Jnaaktta t r W I i » »afeir, ia tit tijtat l Sa»U ftkittt, f Nabtra a««) al* a»tn Ré«ti«t T ftaafarrtat fttata tintata t S r f a M l n M » b«t Dtattr attt aat ktttt arkt attr a Mai«tr ra.at.lt ; («Jalt «t «d> «ft^aabl a . « l , ata »ta »ttttfftabta ttaln aaa) a * »at bitfrltta V»«akt8 ja trkr»ta, all )at Jt K, ba btr 3Mft|aaa« »tf Uab aa» %at btrif«afi(i«t Atltti M »t«

[^19]: H a l t t nmitta (natta aab aitllio taiattita US*. 9anttitbaa,j kwftf 9il»> aa A ^lac Otiftaajdi bttafrt f«4 kit Dtaiia Mf Mf «aaatta tiatrltit« aaf i»tt (iktgraliiflasgta aa btt I X I B I T , (. 13. M f kit Bt Tt H^laa^. M t Bcbt aa» bta t Biffrt Uaf ta C u a w |a tt Valtta, bu ftaklltuu aab »a* iaibi«t £iab«l« aatat^t U- ifakata, aabtttrfttt« trfl-ittra fit btt ll^akta Itbt^l Mlfiu Dnatj abijrftkfa, baft bit Bttttaaat* »tt Vafltt

[^20]: The Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 264, April 5, 1849 with the beginning of Marx's Wage

[^21]: Labour and Capital







**[p. 201]**

The bourgeois,0 therefore, buys their labour with money. They sell him their labour for money.c For the same sum with which the bourgeois has bought their labour,d for example, two francs, he could have bought two pounds of sugar or a definite amount of any other commodity. The two francs, with which he bought two pounds of sugar, are the price of the two pounds of sugar. The two francs, with which he bought twelve hours' labour,6 are the price of twelve hours' labour. Labour/ therefore, is a commodity, neither more nor less than sugar. The former is measured by the clock, the latter by the scales.

The workers exchange their commodity, labour/ for the commod- ity of the capitalist, for money, and this exchange takes place in a definite ratio. So much money for so much labour.g For twelve hours' weaving, two francs. And do not the two francs represent all the other commodities which I can buy for two francs? In fact, therefore, the worker has exchanged his commodity, labour/ for other commodities of all kinds and that in a definite ratio. By giving him two francs, the capitalist has given him so much meat, so much clothing, so much fuel, light, etc., in exchange for his day's labour. Accordingly, the two francs express the ratio in which labourf is exchanged for other commodities, the exchange value of his labour/ The exchange value of a commodity, reckoned in money is what is called its price. Wages are only a special name for the price of labour,h

for the price of this peculiar commodity which has no other repository than human flesh and blood.

[^1]: a The 1891 edition has "capitalist" here instead of "bourgeois".— Ed. b The 1891 edition has "capitalist" here and the words "it seems" are added.— Ed. c In the 1891 edition here follows the passage: "But this is merely the appearance. In reality what they sell to the capitalist for money is their labour power. The capitalist buys this labour power for a day, a week, a month, etc. And after he has bought it, he uses it by having the workers work for the stipulated time".— Ed.

[^2]: d The 1891 edition has "the capitalist has bought their labour power" instead of "the bourgeois has bought their labour".— Ed

[^3]: e The 1891 edition has "use of labour power" instead of "labour".— Ed. f The 1891 edition has "labour power" instead of "labour".— Ed. g The 1891 edition has "so long a use of labour power" instead of "so much labour".— Ed.

[^4]: h The 1891 edition has "the price of labour power, commonly called the price of labour" instead of "the price of labour".— Ed





**[p. 202]**

Wages are, therefore, not the worker's share in the commodity produced by him. Wages are the part of already existing commodities with which the capitalist buys for himself a definite amount of productive labour.h

Labour0 is, therefore, a commodity which its possessor, the wage- worker, sells to capital. Why does he sell it? In order to live.

Butc labour is the worker's own life-activity, the manifestation of his own life. And this life-activity he sells to another person in order to secure the necessary means of subsistence. Thus his life-activity is for him only a means to enable him to exist. He works in order to live. He does not even reckon labour as part of his life, it is rather a sacrifice of his life. It is a commodity which he has made over to another. Hence, also, the product of his activity is not the object of his activity. What he produces for himself is not the silk that he weaves, not the gold that he draws from the mine, not the palace that he builds.

[^1]: a The 1891 edition has here and below "capitalist" instead of "bourgeois".— Ed.

[^2]: The 1891 edition has "labour power" instead of "labour".— Ed. c The 1891 edition has after this: "the exercise of labour power".— Ed,





**[p. 203]**

Labour3 was not always a commodity. Labour was not always wage labour, that is, free labour. The slave did not sell his labour3 to the slave owner, any more than the ox sells its services to the peasant. The slave, together with his labour,3 is sold once and for all to his owner. He is a commodity which can pass from the hand of one owner to that of another. He is himself a commodity, but the labour3

is not his commodity. The serf sells only a part of his labour.3 He does not receive a wage from the owner of the land; rather the owner of the land receives a tribute from him. The serf belongs to the land and turns over to the owner of the land the fruits thereof. The free labourer, on the other hand, sells himself and, indeed, sells himself piecemeal. He sells at auction eight, ten, twelve, fifteen hours of his life, day after day, to the highest bidder, to the owner of the raw materials, instruments of labour and means of subsistence, that is, to the capitalist. The worker belongs neither to an owner nor to the land, but eight, ten, twelve, fifteen hours of his daily life belong to him who buys them. The worker leaves the capitalist to whom he hires himself whenever he likes, and the capitalist discharges him whenever he thinks fit, as soon as he no longer gets any profit out of him, or not the anticipated profit. But the worker, whose sole source of livelihood is the sale of his labour,3 cannot leave the whole class of purchasers, that is, the capitalist class, without renouncing his existence. He belongs not to this or that bourgeois, but to the bourgeoisie, the bourgeois class,b and it is his business to dispose of himself, that is to find a purchaser within this bourgeois class.0

[^1]: 3 The 1891 edition has "labour power" instead of "labour".— Ed.

[^2]: b The 1891 edition has "not to this or that capitalist, but to the capitalist class" instead of "not to this or that bourgeois, but to the bourgeoisie, the bourgeois class".— Ed.

[^3]: c The 1891 edition has "capitalist class" instead of "bourgeois class".— Ed.





**[p. 204]**

Wages, as we have seen, are the price of a definite commodity, of labour.3 Wages are, therefore, determined by the same laws that determine the price of every other commodity.

The question, therefore, is, how is the price of a commodity determined?

[^1]: a The 1891 edition has "labour power" instead of "labour".— Ed.



