---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "65. The Extradition of Political Refugees "
Page_Range: "288-290"
---

# 65. The Extradition of Political Refugees 



**[p. 257]**

[THE EXTRADITION OF POLITICAL REFUGEES]

Cologne, April 12. By the issue of warrants for the arrest of Austrian, German and non-German so-called political criminals, especially Kossuth, Bern, Perczel and other Hungarian heroes, the Prussian Government has already proved the close connection between Prussian constitutional freedom and blood-stained royal imperial martial law. That an entente cordiale between Potsdam and Olmütz206 existed, despite the question of the imperial crown, the German question, the Schleswig-Holstein and other questions, was a fact which could be overlooked only by the diplomatising literary moles from the Kölnische Zeitungand other shrewd journals. But that this entente cordiale was to sink to the lowest depths of vileness, to the infamy of the extradition of political refugees to the Austrians—that is what our glorious Government still had in store for us.

On April 4 of this year the Prussian Government handed over the Viennese cadet Hocke, a comrade-in-arms of Robert Blum's, to the bloodhounds of Austrian martial law. The Oberschlesische Lokomotive published the following report from Ratibor dated April 4:

[^1]: If Robert Blum had escaped from Vienna into Prussia, the Prussian Government would have handed him over to his executioners.207

[^2]: "Yesterday at midday the Viennese cadet Hocke was brought here in a special conveyance under police guard from Breslau, to which town he had fled not long ago, being charged with high treason for his part in the October revolution in Vienna. In a letter to his family in Vienna, Hocke had given his Breslau address. This letter must have shared the fate of many others, i.e. it was opened at some Austrian post station, for soon afterwards the police authorities in Breslau received the order to arrest the aforesaid Hocke at the place where he lived, and to hand him over to the Austrianst

[^3]: "Accordingly, the prisoner arrived here at noon yesterday under escort, where a very serious illness, from which he has suffered for a long time, delayed the continuation of his journey to judgment by court martial. He was put in the town gaol

[^4]: 10*





**[p. 258]**

"It is the most urgent duty of German newspapers forcefully to draw the attention of the Austrian fugitives to the danger to which they are exposed by staying on Prussian, and especially Silesian, soil. The old extradition treaty continues to operate in all its old glory.208 The great German fundamental law, called martial law, is recognised in Prussia just as it is in Austria, and it is being put into effect with relish."

Such an example from the heroes of martial law in the various countries where a state of siege has been proclaimed should not be given us in vain. Just as they assist one another now, so the democrats of all nations, too, will assist one another when the day of reckoning comes.

The royal and ministerial scum of half Europe found a safe refuge in England last spring.209

We assure Herr Manteuffel, Herr Brandenburg and Co. that in the next revolution which they themselves are so busily expediting, no obstacle will be put in the way of England handing them over to the victorious German people thirsting for revenge. Arrangements for that have already been made.

[^1]: Written by Engels on April 12, 1849

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 271 (second edition), April 13, 1849

[^3]: Printed according to the newspaper

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



