---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "66. From the Theatre of War.Š The German Navy "
Page_Range: "290-292"
---

# 66. From the Theatre of War.Š The German Navy 



**[p. 259]**

FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR.— THE GERMAN NAVY

Schleswig-Holstein. The Danes have left Hadersleben and the town has been re-occupied by the imperial army.210 A few particulars have come in on the fighting in the Sundewitt area, according to which losses on both sides were fairly high. The imperial army has taken a number of prisoners.

North-German papers are still largely occupied with that remark- able stroke of luck in the port of Eckernförde.211 This unique and quite unexpected event will probably figure as the greatest imperial military feat until the next German revolution. It has become clear that the Danes had definite orders to carry out the crazy attempt on Eckernförde. Obviously, in the prevailing circumstances they were bound to suffer such a defeat. Moreover, this whole affair shows what a droll institution the German Navy is. For the German Navy, which still exists only on paper, in spite of all the money, earrings, bracelets and false jewels sent to Frankfurt, is now at last to become a reality. It is to be built from—the wreckage of the Danish battleship Christian den ottende which was blown to smithereens! We are not joking. All Eckernförde, along with the victorious imperial troops stationed there, is busy fishing for splinters, gun-carriages, water kegs, yards, etc. as these are driven ashore, and storing them for the building of the German Navy. The Hamburg Börsen-Halle reports all this with appropriate seriousness. For our part, we predict that the gloriously captured Gefion will be brilliandy recaptured by the Danes as soon as she shows herself on the high sea.

Four Danish blockade ships, three frigates and a corvette, are already again lying off the Elbe. The frigate Havfruen is lying off the Oder. This is a good opportunity for the German Navy to show itself, but it will fight shy of that. The whole German Navy served no



**[p. 260]**

The whole story of the German Navy is sheer plagiarism, it has all happened before. Many years ago the Belgian model state (on the water Germany's model state as well) bought from a Liverpool shipping company the steamship The British Queen for 1,200,000 francs in order to open up a steamship line between Antwerp and New York. On the masts of this ship was hoisted the black-red-and-gold flag which the German fatherland also has in common with the Belgian model state.212 But what happened? On the very first voyage it became clear that The British Queen was not seaworthy, and this cast-off Liverpool ship was lying in the Antwerp dock ever since until at last, some little time ago, it was resold for 130,000 francs under the description "old wood".

That is the German Navy! When the Danes next take a German ship, they will auction it also in Copenhagen for "old wood".

That the Germans will never become a naval power is the fault of their geographical position. But they could have a navy which would at least protect their coasts and rule in the Baltic, in spite of Danes and Russians. But even that they will never get so long as the black-red-and-gold and black-and-white213 imperial trash prevails. A German Navy will only be possible when the red flag is hoisted on its masts.

[^1]: Written by Engels about April 12, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 271, April 13, 1849 time



