---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "73. Parliamentary Decisions Are Disregarded.Š Manteuf fel's Spies "
Page_Range: "312-313"
---

# 73. Parliamentary Decisions Are Disregarded.Š Manteuf fel's Spies 



**[p. 281]**

[PARLIAMENTARY DECISIONS ARE DISREGARDED.— MANTEUFFEL'S SPIES]

Berlin, April 13. Of course no notice at all is being taken of the motion passed by the Second Chamber that goods up to 5 lbs. should be post-free. The decision has been taken and although it is the custom in constitutional states for the House to decide matters of this kind independently, Herr von der Heydt has different ideas about these things. To date he has not even thought it worth the trouble to express his opinion on the matter in question.

As is well known, Herr von Meusebachh the most indispensable of all government counsellors. Nobody understands how to make the best and most valuable use of his eyes and ears, as he does, and always to provide his friend Manteuffel with the best and up-to-the minute reports about the frame of mind and intentions etc. of the Berliners. It is quite natural that the author of the "Revelations" should have great skill in matters which in ordinary language are called spying! He makes use of various literary rogues for these noble aims. His most intimate friends and most skilful tools are Gbdsche, the well-known columnist of the Kreuz-Zeitung, and Röhrdanz, the writer.*

A note has also arrived from Mecklenburg which expresses opposition to the definite acceptance of the imperial crown by the King of Prussia.224

[^1]: Written by Marx on April 13, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 273 (second edition), time April 15, 1849

[^3]: * Herr Röhrdanz was suspected of similar activities in Paris as early as 1844 and is hereby challenged to answer these accusations. The Editors of the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung".



