---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "May"
Page_Range: "399-504"
---

# May



**[p. 368]**

FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR

No reports of further victories. On the contrary, we hear now that the Austrians are retreating in the greatest confusion on all fronts.

The brutal butcher Weiden has landed himself in a fine mess. He is as good as cut off from Vienna, and the only line of retreat still open to him is that to Styria via Vesprim, along the Plattensee and through the pathless mountains.

Wohlgemuth, completely cut off from the main body of the army, is in a totally indefensible position between Sellye on the Waag and Bös on the Danube, on the Schutt Island. The path to Pressburg is open to Klapka's right wing, which faces Wohlgemuth there.

Pest is now actually occupied by the Hungarians (on the evening of the 23rd). The imperial forces were given sufficient time for their retreat, since on that condition they promised not to bombard Pest. The pretence of the imperial forces to wish to defend Ofen is without significance, for Ofen could have been held only by threatening to bombard Pest.

Weiden has again been in Ofen. He obviously does not know where to turn.

Jellachich's Croats have had to turn back; the Danube below Pest was occupied by the Hungarians with artillery. But they will nevertheless attempt to break through to Croatia.

Jablonowsky has already passed through Raab with his brigade, which is going to Oedenburg.

There is great excitement in Vienna. The workers are rejoicing. The mail to Hungary has not been dispatched from there for the past three days.

Fifty thousand Russians are said to have received orders to march into Transylvania from the north and south.



**[p. 369]**

The Berlin National-Zeitung quotes the following alleged condi- tions under which the Hungarians would be willing to conclude peace:

(1) Recognition of the Kingdom of Hungary in its old boundaries, hence including Croatia, Slavonia and the Military Border.282

(2) Union with Transylvania as resolved and determined last year by the Transylvanian and Hungarian Assemblies.283

(3) A general amnesty throughout Austria; the immediate release of all the October prisoners3 and compensation for the families of those murdered.

(4) Demobilisation to Hungary of the Hungarian regiments still serving in Italy and the other parts of the Empire.

(5) Recognition of the Hungarian Constitution of 1848.284

(6) Hungary to remain under the government of a provisional executive power originating from the Assembly, until the succession to the throne is established by law, and the King, who is to be elected, has been crowned in Buda-Pest and has sworn loyalty to the Constitution.

(7) Galicia to enter into the same relationship to the Austrian union of states in which Hungary stands now and will stand in future, and be called the Polish Kingdom of Galicia; hence Galicia will be linked with Austria in a personal union and will have its own army and its own finances.

(8) The share of Hungary in the Austrian National Debt to be determined by the Hungarian Assembly by a simple majority.

[^1]: Written by Engels on April 30, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 286, May 1, 1849 time

[^3]: a Those arrested when the October 1848 uprising in Vienna was crushed.— Ed.





**[p. 370]**

THE COUNTER-REVOLUTIONARY PLANS IN BERLIN

Cologne, April 30. The plans of our counter-revolutionary Government are gradually being revealed.

It was intended that a new stage of the Prussian counter-revolution should date from April 27. It was desired to provoke the Berlin people into street fighting, perhaps to allow the insurrection à la Cavaignac to achieve "considerable magnitude", then to crush it by Cavaignac's means and with superior force such as Cavaignac possessed, to proclaim martial law, to favour a few deputies and a good number of agitators285 with powder and shot, and finally, by new dictated measures to get rid of the troublesome fetters which even the martial-law Charter of December 5 still imposed on our counter- revolution.

The provoked uprising would have provided a sufficient excuse for asserting that the people "were not yet mature enough" for the freedom most graciously bestowed on them, and that it was impossible to govern under such an electoral law and such a Constitution.286 "To avoid bloodshed", and therefore in the interests of the people, the last remnants of freedom had to be destroyed. "To avoid bloodshed", a state of siege had to be proclaimed throughout the country with the exception of Further Pomerania! All that could be asserted only after a decent-sized revolt in Berlin, with the requisite disturbances in Breslau, Magdeburg, Cologne etc., had taken place and had been successfully suppressed with the aid of grape-shot.

Hence the brutal behaviour of the constables against the Left assembled in the Konversationshalle,287 and the cordon of troops encircling Dönhoff Square; hence the rapid fire on an unarmed peaceful crowd, which could not disperse because all the streets were barred to it.

The calm behaviour of the people despite all provocation upset the calculations of the counter-revolutionaries. They have no pretext for issuing dictates, but dictate they must. Perhaps this evening already we shall learn what new turn these gentlemen have decided on.

What extensive plans were envisaged is evident from all the circumstances. Firstly, from the simultaneous dissolution of the Chamber in Hanover, secondly and in particular, from Herr Radowitz's journey to Berlin.

Herr Radowitz is the heart and soul of the Prussian counter- revolution. He drafted the plan for the counter-revolution of November last, but he himself still remained behind the scenes and intrigued in Frankfurt on behalf of the Prussian hereditary imperial crown. This time Radowitz himself went to Berlin in order, it is said, to come out in the open at last and to become Prime Minister. A Radowitz Government — that is the heart of the matter!3

Furthermore, we definitely know the following facts:

1) In the course of last week all Chefpräsidenten received from their Oberpräsidenten a document informing them of the forthcoming dissolution of the Chamber and directing them to take all necessary precautionary measures.

2) A ministerial rescript was sent to all government authorities stating:

1. That all burgomasters are obliged to report daily to the appropriate government authorities about the impression produced by the dissolution of the Chamber. The government authorities, for their part, must present collective reports on this subject to the Ministry.

2. For the present new elections would not be held; on the other hand, measures will be taken against many members of the "so-called" Left.

3. All precautionary measures should be taken to suppress any attempt at revolt.

The rescript is signed: Manteuffel.

Herr Manteuffel, or rather Herr Radowitz, his superior, could not have rendered a better service to the developing Hungarian-Polish- German revolution than precisely at the present time to come forward openly with his plans for the restoration of the absolutist regime.

[^1]: Written by Engels on April 30, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 286, May 1, 1849 time

[^3]: a Goethe, Faust, 1. Teil, 1. "Studierzimmerszene".— Ed.





**[p. 372]**

LASSALLE

Cologne, May 1. The day after tomorrow the indictment against Lassalleon the charge of direct incitement to take up arms against the royal power will come before the Assizes in Düsseldorf.

It will be recalled that Lassalle, Cantador (head of the Düsseldorf civic militia) and the street-vendor Weyers were arrested last November when the state of siege was proclaimed in Düsseldorf, and an investigation was begun against them on account of the above-mentioned "crime under Articles 87 and 102 of the Code pénal".288

The investigation proceeded as slowly as possible. Whereas the simultaneously instituted tax-refusal trial of the Rhenish District Committee of Democrats took place already on February 8 in Cologne,289 one assize period after another elapsed in Düsseldorf before the Cologne indictment board had even referred the case to the Assizes. But Marx, Schneider and Schapper were at liberty, whereas Lassalle was kept in the Düsseldorf remand prison; yet the Code d'instruction criminelle290 lays down that the case of an arrested person should have priority in being dealt with!

In prison Lassalle was given a quite special kind of preference. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has often enough had occasion to report examples of the tenderness with which he was treated by the myrmidons of the royal-Prussian judiciary.3 Whereas all sorts of favours were conferred on Cantador—for, despite his political activity, Cantador had a great many friends among the Düsseldorf bourgeoisie—Lassalle had once again291 to experience the arbitrary

[^1]: a See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 344-46, 463-65, 474-76 and this volume, pp. 339-41.— Ed.





**[p. 373]**

We recall further that the physician considered that outdoor walks were absolutely necessary for Lassalle's health, to which the Public Prosecutor's office gave its consent, whereas the government authority prohibited them, although according to the law a prisoner undergoing examination does not come under the jurisdiction of the govern- ment authority but solely under that of the Public Prosecutor.

The difficulties involved in gaining access to Lassalle in the prison, the excuses, evasions etc. are familiar to everyone who has ever tried to penetrate into the interior of the Düsseldorf "institution".

The investigation was at last concluded and the case should have gone to the Court. There was then still enough time to bring the case for trial at the last Assizes, which were held in February and March. But they wanted to prevent this at all costs. When the dossiers were submitted to the deputy Chief Public Prosecutor, the "gracious" Herr von Ammon I, for his final conclusion, Herr Ammon suddenly produced a letter from Lassalle to a certain Stangier, a farmer in the Altenkirchen district, in order to base a fresh charge on it. But this letter had for several weeks already lain quietly in the office desk of

Herr Ammon, without the idea occurring to him of adding it to the dossiers as a new point in the indictment. Now, when everything was ready and the time for the Assizes was at hand, now Herr Ammon came forward with the letter. Then, of course, new interrogations of witnesses had to take place and the case was delayed for several weeks. And this period was just sufficient to make it impossible for Lassalle's case to be dealt with at the Assizes then about to be held.

The letter, which Herr Ammon, as he himself admitted, had kept for a fairly long time in his office desk, was moreover so unimportant that neither the Court nor the indictment board paid any attention to it or listed it as an additional reason for indictment!

In short, the Assizes were successfully avoided, and the next session began only in May. One deputation after another went to the Public Prosecutor General Herr Nicolovius, and asked for the case to be expedited or for an extraordinary session of the Assizes to be called. Herr Nicolovius promised to do all he could and stated that in



**[p. 374]**

The Court at last decided: all three accused were referred to the indictment board. But here a difficulty arose: people were quite convinced that in the whole Düsseldorf Circuit no jury could be found that would convict Herr Cantador. Hence in order to free Cantador, Lassalle also would have to be acquitted, even by people who would otherwise have convicted him. And it was precisely the conviction of Lassalle that was desired by the authorities in Düsseldorf, the Government, and even the very high and supreme camarilla. The hostility to Lassalle "does not even stop short of the throne".

This is what has happened:

"The indictment board drops the case against Cantador and sets him free, whereas Lassalle and Weyers remain in prison and have to come before the Assizes."

Yet the charge against Cantador was exactly the same as against Lassalle, except for a single speech which Lassalle made in Neuss.292

And it is precisely this speech in Neuss that is seized on and for which Lassalle is committed to the Assizes.

Let us briefly recall the whole course of events. At a time when at any day an open struggle could break out between the now defunct National Assembly and the Crown, Düsseldorf was, as is well known, one of the greatest centres of agitation of all the towns in the Rhine Province. The civic militia here was completely on the side of the National Assembly and, moreover, was led by a democrat. It was ready to turn passive resistance into active resistance as soon as Berlin gave the signal for it. Arms and munitions were available. Lassalle and Cantador stood at the head of the whole movement. They not merely called on the citizens to arm themselves against the Manteuffel Government, they actually provided them with arms. Here, in Düsseldorf, was the centre of their activity. It was here, therefore, if any crime had actually been committed, that this crime must have taken place. But where is it supposed to have taken place? Not in Düsseldorf, but—in Neuss!!

Lassalle was at a meeting in Neuss and called for armed reinforcements to be sent to Düsseldorf. This call did not even have any result, because matters never reached the point of fighting. And yet Lassalle's crime is supposed to consist in this!

Consequently, Lassalle has not been committed for trial at the Assizes on account of his main activity, on account of the actual arming, or the actual uprising, that was on the point of breaking out in Düsseldorf. There was no "crime" in that. Even the indictment



**[p. 375]**

But, of course, Cantador was not in Neuss when Lassalle made this terrible speech; Cantador did not call on the inhabitants of Neuss for armed resistance, Cantador merely—organised the inhabitants of Düsseldorf for armed resistance and called on the Düsseldorf civic militia, which is itself part of the Government's armed force, to resist the Government. That is the difference, and that is why Cantador was set free, and Lassalle kept in prison up to the present session of the Assizes.

But that is not all. Lassalle also directly appealed to the farmer Stangier for armed reinforcements to be sent to Düsseldorf. This letter is in the dossiers and is cited word for word in the indictment (see Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 277, second edition). Did the indictment regard this letteras a reason for committing Lassalle to the Assizes? By no means. Even the Court, which had put forward nine counts against Lassalle, eight of which were dropped by the indictment board, never thought of including this letter among them. But this letter contains exactly the same alleged "crime" as that committed by Lassalle in Neuss.

Rarely has anything more inconsistent, more contradictory and more incomprehensible been fabricated than this decision of the indictment board to send the case for trial.

But what is certainly commendable is the following: even according to the decision of the Cologne indictment board, in all the agitation that was carried out in Düsseldorf last November, in the direct Coil for resistance to the Government, in the arming, in the procurement of ammunition, in the direct and open opposition of the civic militia to the Government, in the oath sworn by the civic militia that they would fight, arms in hand, against the Government and in support of the National Assembly—in all this there was no crime. The Cologne indictment board has said so.

And it is true that on this point it agrees with the Cologne Court, and indeed with the Cologne Public Prosecutor's office. During the investigation of the case against the Rhenish District Committee, they both calmly ignored the call to arm against the "enemy", took no notice of the criminal case involved, and confined themselves merely to the fact of a call to revolt punishable by a police court, and it came before the Assizes only because it was issued through the press.



**[p. 376]**

We need merely to recall here the course of the trial of the Rhenish District Committee. The case is completely analagous. At that trial it was argued that the matter under consideration was either a crime (the same as that of which Lassalle is accused) or nothing at all, and that it was not possible to call for armed resistance to the Government without at the same time calling for resistance to all the individual officials who constitute the Government. The jury's verdict was an acquittal.

Lassalle will be in the same position when, after his indubitable acquittal by the jury, he comes before the police court. But meanwhile they have a pretext to apply for the prolongation of the arrest, and in addition it is easier to manipulate the police court than the jurymen!

Tomorrow we shall deal with the indictment itself, and from it, too, prove the absurdity of this whole trial.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 1, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 287, May 2, 1849 time





**[p. 377]**

A PRUSSIAN KICK FOR THE FRANKFURT ASSEMBLY

Cologne, May 1. Another new item in the history of the Prussian counter-revolution. The King gives the Frankfurt Assembly a determined kick and contemptuously casts in its face the proffered gold-tinsel crown of an imaginary empire.293

If at the right time the Frankfurt Assembly had acted with energy, it could now order the arrest of this Hohenzollern, who is filled with insolence, and commit him to the Assize Court for "insult to the National Assembly" (Law of September 1848, published also in Prussia294). As yet there exists no "imperial" law that declares the individual sovereigns exempt also from responsibility in regard to the "empire"; and the imperial irresponsibility has been rejected by the Hohenzollern.

The new Prussian "imperial" Note of April 28 softens the "imperial" kick by a few kind observations about the so-called German imperial Constitution. This innocent botchwork is depicted in the Note as a supreme example of all that is bad and as an extreme product of revolution and secret republicanism "exceeding all bounds".

St. Paul's Church as a robbers' cave of carbonari!295 Welcker and Gagern as secret republicans, "Moros with a dagger under his cloak"3! Bassermann, the man who sees spectres, himself turned into one of the "Bassermannic characters"296! That, of course, is flattering for the worthy Frankfurt deputies after all the scorn with which they have been treated by the people, after all the curses

[^1]: a Schiller, "Die Bürgschaft".— Ed.



The Prussian Note is the last threat to the Frankfurt Assembly even before it is actually dispersed. Once more the stubborn Hohenzollern proffers his hand for a "reconciliation". And, in point of fact, after the Assembly has gone so far it could truly make one little step further and become completely a tool of Prussia.

Meanwhile, however, a section of the people, and especially the peasantry and the lower middle class of the small south German states, cling to the Assembly and to the so-called imperial Constitu- tion. The army is favourably disposed towards the imperial Constitution. The people regard every step, however small, towards the unification of Germany as a step towards abolition of the petty sovereigns and liberation from the oppressive burden of taxation. The hatred of Prussia, too, plays a part here. The Swabians even made a revolution in support of the so-called imperial Constitu- tion297; it was, of course, à storm in a teacup, but all the same it was something.

Hence, if the worthy Frankfurt deputies possessed the slightest degree of courage, it would not be possible to disperse the Frankfurt Assembly without the use of force. They now have a last opportunity of atoning at least for a small part of the grievous sins they have committed. If simultaneously with the victories of the Hungarians, the break-up of Austria, and the fury of the people in Prussia at the Hohenzollern-Radowitz-Manteuffel betrayals, Frankfurt and South Germany were to rise up openly in defence of the imperial Constitution, they could form a temporary centre for a new revolutionary uprising based on Hungary.

But then the worthy deputies would not have to shrink from proclaiming civil war either and, in the extreme case, if it comes to making a decision, they would have to prefer a united and indivisible German republic to a restoration of the German Federal Diet.298

But anyone who supposes the Frankfurters capable of that is greatly mistaken. These gentlemen will make a little noise, offer a little resistance, enough to satisfy at least to some extent the requirements of decency, and then they will agree to everything that the stubborn Hohenzollern dictates to them. Here and there, perhaps, the people will erect barricades and—will be betrayed as on September 18.2"

That would be the end of the famous imperial bombastic dramatical performance, if it depended on the Frankfurt gentlemen.

Written by Engels on May 1, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 287, May 2, 1849 time



**[p. 380]**

[THE DISSOLUTION]

Cologne, May 1. Deputies who arrived here yesterday from Berlin report that the Chambers have been dissolved in Dresden as well.300

Hanover, Berlin, Dresden—in Munich there has so far only been an adjournment—do you, honest German citizen, now realise what tune is to be played?

Last year, when the Frankfurt Assembly was convened, Prussia ordered all the small states to convene their Chambers. Now, exacdy one year later, Prussia orders them to dissolve all the Chambers. Then it was Camphausen, now it is Manteuffel. On each occasion there was the same aim, the same intention. Despite all the phrases, Camphausen and Manteuffel go arm in arm.

And there are still people in Germany who defend the sovereigns!

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 1, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 287, May 2, 1849 time





**[p. 381]**

[FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR]

Cologne, evening of May 1. Reports just received from Berlin and Vienna confirm the continued withdrawal of the imperial troops. In Pressburg, where on the 27th nothing was known about attacks by the Hungarians, there are continuous commotion, confusion and retreat.

An encounter took place near Komorn. A force consisting of two divisions of imperial troops under Schlick drove the Hungarians from the Sandberg near Acs and this is now presented as a victory. But, on looking at the map and discovering that Acs is situated on the right bank of the Danube, a mile* from Komorn, the fact emerges that, even according to this official account, the Hungarians have crossed the Danube near Komorn and are in command of the road from Gran to Pressburg. And Schlick still talks about the royal imperial troops surrounding (!) Komorn!!

Welden's headquarters, transferred from Pest to Kapolna, from Kapolna to Raab, is now moving even further back, to Oedenburg, hard by the Styrian border and to the south of Vienna.

Jellachich has actually received orders to cut his way through to Croatia and to drum up as many men to escort him as possible.

North of the Danube, Wohlgemuth has temporarily disappeared from the scene. He was driven off Schutt (the big island in the Danube); and the Csikos (mounted Landsturm) patrolled with impunity from Komorn to Szerdahely, halfway to Pressburg. Wohlgemuth must have withdrawn towards Pressburg and the March.

[^1]: a See footnote on p. 20.— Ed.





**[p. 382]**

It is reported that intervention by the Russians is imminent. One paper even maintains they have taken up positions near Lunden- burg, on the border between Austria, Moravia and Hungary, but this is obviously a complete fabrication. It is expected that, as in Transylvania, they will be used as reserve and garrison troops in the towns, thus leaving all the Austrian troops free to concentrate on the Hungarians. It is said that 15,000 Russians are to come to Vienna as a garrison.

A Prussian staff officer has also arrived in Olmütz "for the purpose of reaching an understanding with the Austrian Govern- ment". When "My glorious army"301 marches in, the Bohemians will soon discover the meaning of this "understanding"!

Tomorrow evening we shall probably have news of further decisive Magyar successes.

Written by Engels on May 1, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 287, time May 2, 1849

[^1]: a The Austrian imperial colours.— Ed.





**[p. 383]**

LASSALLE

Cologne, May 2. Yesterday we promised to return to the indictment against Lassalle.3

Lassalle is charged with a "crime under Articles 87 and 102 of the Criminal Code".b

Article 87 is directed against an "attempt or a plot the aim of which is to incite (exciter) the citizens or inhabitants to take up arms against the imperial power".

Article 102 imposes the punishments (mainly the death penalty) laid down in the preceding Articles of the section (which includes Article 87) on all those who by speeches in public places or at public meetings, or by the display of posters, incite (excitent) the citizens to commit these crimes. Only in the event of the incitement being unsuccessful is the penalty mitigated to exile.

Of what is Lassalle being accused? Since under a single charge he is alleged to have sinned against Article 87 and simultaneously against Article 102, he can only be accused:

of having called for the commission of crimes listed in Article 87 in the manner of Article 102, i.e.

of having incited, the citizens to prepare an attempt or a plot the aim of which is an incitement to take up arms against the royal power, i.e.

of having incited the citizens to incitement to take up arms!

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 376.— Ed. b i.e. Napoleon's Code pénal which was in force in the Rhine Province of Prussia.— Ed.

[^2]: 14-699



The point is that Article 102, which makes incitement to commit the crimes envisaged in Articles 86-101 equivalent to the commission of the crime itself, is, if the incitement is successful, quite properly applicable to all of these Articles. It applies even to the remaining items of this same Article 87. For all these Articles are directed against definite actions, to the commission of which instigation is possible. Article 87, for example, which is directed against commission of an attempt or a plot, speaks also about an attempt or plot against the life and person of the Emperor, and about an attempt or plot aimed at altering or destroying the form of government or the order of succession to the throne. All these are things to which one can "incite" people. Incitement to regicide, or to a revolution, is a possible fact; incitement to a plot the aim of which is regicide or a revolution can also occur. But " incitement to prepare an attempt or plot for the purpose of inciting people to take up arms against the royal power", in short, incitement to incitement, is a crime as impossible and as absurd as "an attempt at a remote attempt at high treason", which in the good old times of Prussian Law302 cost many an unfortunate member of a students' association ten years imprison- ment in a fortress, or as the notorious suspect de suspicion d'incivisme (suspected of suspicion of lack of civic sense), which people wearing legitimist spectacles claim to have found in the prison lists of the time of the Terror in 1793.

Alternatively, if the "incitement to incitement to take up arms" is really a crime that is logically and juridically possible, then for Lassalle to come simultaneously under the passage in question of Article 87 and under Article 102, he should have been indicted not for the speech in Neuss, but for the address to the National Assembly, which states: "We beseech the National Assembly: Issue a call to arms!"303

Here is the "incitement to incitement to take up arms". Butithasnot even occurred to this ne plus ultra of an indictment to see a crime in these words.

How did it happen that, out of the long series of Articles in the section in question, the Public Prosecutor's office selected and combined with Article 102 precisely the passage to which Article 102 does not apply at all?

Quite simply. The crime envisaged by Article 87 involves the death penalty. But in the whole of the Rhine Province no jury could be found that would assist in condemning Lassalle to death. The prosecution



**[p. 385]**

Hence, in order to get rid of Lassalle, the prosecution invented an impossible crime and combined two passages of the law which in combination are sheer nonsense.

Therefore, either Lassalle is guilty of having violated Article 87, and then one should have the courage to condemn him to death outright, or he is not guilty of having violated Article 87, and then he has not violated Article 102 either, and must certainly be acquitted. But to violate Article 87 in the passage quoted and Article 102 at the same time is an impossibility.

Note the craftiness of the prosecution. The charge against Lassalle really comes under Article 87 (death penalty). But they do not dare to bring that charge against him; so he is charged under Article 87 in combination with Article 102 (exile). And if that does not succeed, if the jury acquits him, he will be brought before the police court and charged under Articles 209 and 217 (six days' to one year's imprisonment). And all this for one and the same fact, for his activity as an agitator during the movement to refuse payment of taxes!

Let us now look at the actual corpus delicti—the speech in Neuss on November 21.

Lassalle is charged with having directly incited the people to take up arms against the royal power.

According to the statements of the three witnesses referred to in the indictment, Lassalle did directly incite the inhabitants of Neuss to arm themselves, to procure ammunition, to safeguard by force of arms the liberties they had won, to support the National Assembly by effective action etc. However incitement to take up arms in general is by no means an offence, and still less a crime, most certainly not since the revolution and the law of April 6, 1848304 which guarantees to every Prussian the right to bear arms. According to the Code pénal, incitement to take up arms is punishable only if the arming is directed against individual officials (revolt) or against the royal power, or against another section of the citizens (riot). The present case relates especially to incitement, and indeed to direct incitement to take up arms against the royal power.

In all three statements of the witnesses, however, there is not a single word about taking up arms against the royal power, they mention only taking up arms to protect the National Assembly. But the National Assembly was a legally constituted, legally existing body, an

[^1]: 14*





**[p. 386]**

The only passage in which the sensitive nose of a Public Prosecutor could discover a remote reference to the "royal Government" was that concerning the gun-batteries in Neuss. But did Lassalle incite the people of Neuss to arm themselves in order to seize the batteries on the left bank of the Rhine, and in particular did he do so "directly", as is asserted in the résumé of the indictment and as is required for a conviction?

On the contrary! Neither "direcdy" nor indirecdy did he incite them to do so. He merely said that the people of Düsseldorf were expecting that the people of Neuss would seize these batteries. And this mere expression of an "expectation" is, in the opinion of the worthy Public Prosecutors, an excitation directe, a direct incitement to take up arms against the royal power!

Thus, in the quite real arming of Düsseldorf, openly organised for the protection of the National Assembly and clearly directed against none other than the Prussian troops, i.e. against the royal Government (le gouvernement de l'empereur), there is no crime at all, there is merely the offence of resistance to individual officials; but in that mere statement, in those few words, there is a serious crime!

For what Lassalle did, they do not dare to accuse him; but what he said is supposed to be a serious crime. And what did he say? That it was expected that the people of Neuss would seize the batteries. And who did he say was expecting it? Was it perhaps Lassalle himself? On the contrary, it was the people of Düsseldorf!

Lassalle said that third persons expect you to do such and such, and according to the logic of the public prosecution that is a "direct appeal" to you actually to do what is expected.

In Berlin, the Ministers have now dissolved the Chamber and are preparing for further dictatorial measures. Let us suppose that today universal suffrage were to be arbitrarily abolished, the right of association suppressed, freedom of the press destroyed. If we say: We expect that the people will reply to this disgraceful perfidy by erecting barricades -—then, according to the Public Prosecutors, we have "directly incited" the citizens of Berlin to arm themselves

The secret of the whole court action against Lassalle consists in its being an arbitrary trial of a troublesome agitator. In a concealed form it is a trial on a charge of "stirring up discontent"305 such as prior to the March days we, too, had the pleasure of enjoying here on the Rhine. In the same way, the trial instituted against Weyers is in a concealed form a trial on a charge of lèse-majesté. Weyers said: "death to the King" and "the King ought not to be allowed to have the crown a quarter of an hour longer". And these few words, quite innocent from the point of view of the Code pénal, are similarly alleged to contain a "direct-incitement to take up arms"!

And even if Lassalle had actually called for arming against the roy- al power, what would this mean? Let us adopt the constitutional standpoint and speak in accordance with constitutional ideas. At that time, in November, was it not the duty of every citizen not only to "call for arming", but to take up arms himself in defence of the constitutional representatives of the people against a perfidious "royal Government" which, with the aid of soldiers, drove the Assembly of people's representatives from one building to another, dispersed their sittings, allowed soldiers to use their official documents as spills and for lighting stoves, and finally sent the representatives packing? According to the decisions of the United Diet, and according to Herr Camphausen's famous "legal basis", not to mention the achievements of March 19,a was not the Assembly an "entity on a footing of equality" with the Crown? And should one not be allowed to defend such an Assembly against encroachments by the so-called "royal Government"?

Moreover, we have seen that it has become second nature for the "royal Government" to bestow kicks on the people's representatives. Hardly two months after the convocation of the imposed Chambers this same "royal Government" disperses them at the first objection- able decision—disperses the very Chambers which were supposed to revise the Constitution! The Chambers have now recognised the validity of the imposed Constitution, and now we know still less whether we have a Constitution or not. Who knows what will be imposed on us tomorrow?

And the people who foresaw all that and acted accordingly, who strove energetically to oppose these violent activities of an arrogant camarilla, and who, according to the views of all constitutional

[^1]: a i.e. achievements of the March revolution of 1848 in Prussia.— Ed.



Written by Engels on May 2, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 288, May 3, 1849 time



**[p. 389]**

PROHIBITION OF THE MEETING OF THE RHENISH MUNICIPAL COUNCILS

Cologne, May 2. It is with especial satisfaction that we inform our readers that the meeting of the representatives of municipal councils of the Rhine Province convened by the praiseworthy Cologne municipal council has been prohibited by a simple government order.306 The "good citizens", who felt so "comfortable" when meetings of democrats were prohibited in September,307 can now offer thanks to their lords and masters. In September 1848 the democrats' right of assembly was destroyed at least by the respectable violence of the state of siege; the Cologne municipal council's right of assembly, on the other hand, has met its end by a kick at a time when the legal basis is in finest flower.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 2, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 288, May 3, 1849 time





**[p. 390]**

[FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR]

Cologne, evening of May 2. The Hungarians are taking advantage of the Austrians' hasty retreat and confusion to make a rapid advance on Vienna, on the one hand, and, on the other, to occupy the whole of Upper Hungary up to the Jablunka Pass and the Moravian border. The Slovakian mountain towns are in their hands, and from there they have advanced to the Jablunka Pass. The Pass itself seems to have been taken by them already, for the thunder of artillery has been heard in Neutitschein (near Teschen), indicating that fighting has already occurred on this side of the Carpathians.

As a result of this swift operation Slovakia has been entirely cleared of imperial troops, the Hungarians thereby gaining an area of 300-350 square miles, with more than 2 million inhabitants providing a source of fresh recruits. The Slovaks, who were formerly in part indifferent, in part even anti-Magyar, are now definitely on the side of the Magyars, since the latter have abolished the feudal burdens of the Slovak peasants and made a number of concessions with regard to language and nationality.

It is expected that the Magyars will cross the Little Carpathians (border range between Moravia and Hungary) and direct the spearhead of their attack against Olmütz. By dispatching a corps over the Jablunka they could also destroy the railway line to Vienna, thus considerably delaying the Russians' march on that city. Almost all regular troops have been withdrawn from the whole of Moravia; the national guard has replaced them everywhere.

On the other flank, the Magyars are advancing directly on Vienna and have, according to our Breslau correspondent, already occupied

Raab. The Austrian headquarters has been transferred to Oedenburg, and the commissariat from Pressburg to Hainburg (6 miles from



**[p. 391]**

The line along which the Austrians are attempting to rally their forces for a fresh batde is as follows: the right wing is concentrated around Oedenburg, from the southern tip of Neusiedler Lake nearly up to Güns and the Styrian mountains which it touches on the right; the centre stretches from the northern tip of Neusiedler Lake up to the Danube near Hainburg, blocking the road to Vienna; the left wing, Wohlgemuth's corps, on the other side of the Danube near Pressburg, is in a position it cannot possibly hold and from which it will certainly have to withdraw across the River March. As a result the war will be carried into the territory of Austria itself, and Kossuth will continue to wage it there as well. Kossuth has declared his intention of forestalling the Russians and being in Vienna on May 10. And Kossuth has shown that he knows how to keep his word. He wanted to be in Pest on April 24 and he entered it on that very day.

There is complete obscurity about what has happened to Jellachich. Some sources state that he is already near Mohacs, not far from the Slavonian border (an impossibility since the distance from Pest to Mohacs is much too great). According to other rumours, from black-and-yellowa sources, he has again taken up his position on the Rakos plain308 near Pest. The latter is, of course, even less true than the former.

From the south no direct confirmation has as yet been received of the capture of Semlin by the Magyars. The rest of the news from this area is contradictory; so is that about the arrival of the Russians. All that is certain is that the Russian troops encamped on the Cracow border have been concentrated and are on the point of marching into Austria.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 2, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 288, time March 3, 1849

[^3]: a The Austrian imperial colours.— Ed.





**[p. 392]**

THE CONGRESS OF RHENISH TOWNS

Cologne, May 3. The congress of Rhenish municipal councils will take place after all, although in a less official form, and not until next Tuesday.309

It goes without saying that we are expecting nothing at all from this assembly composed of bourgeois elected on the basis of three classes according to the property qualification with the mass of the people debarred from voting. A deputation is to be sent to Berlin, which will not even be allowed into the presence of Herr von Hohenzollern.

But it may be that the congress will not take place at all. On Sunday various party congresses will be held here in Cologne.310 The Government is trying at all costs to provoke a conflict between the people and the army, in order to be able to muzzle us Rhinelanders, just as the Berliners have been muzzled.

It depends on the workers of Cologne whether this subtle Prussian plan will be frustrated. By their calm behaviour, by unshakeable equanimity in the face of the provocations of the soldiers, the Cologne workers can deprive the Government of any excuse for acts of violence.

Decisive events are at hand. Vienna, Bohemia, South Germany, Berlin, are in a ferment and await the right moment. Cologne can play its part, it can play a very powerful part, but it cannot begin any decisive action.

Let the workers of Cologne bear in mind, especially next Sunday, that all the provocations of the Government aim only at causing an outburst of such a kind as will occur at a moment unfavourable for us but favourable for the Government.



**[p. 393]**

Workers of Cologne, remember the 25th of September!311

Written by Engels on May 3, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 289, May 4, 1849 time



**[p. 394]**

[THE THIRD PARTY IN THE ALLIANCE]

Cologne, May 3. We have pointed out a hundred times that in the coalition of Russia and Austria Herr von Hohenzollern and his Ministry are the "third party in the alliance".3 A hundred times the honest German citizen has indignandy rejected such an as- sertion.

Very well then: it is now firmly established that one of the secret reasons for the dissolution of the Chambers was that, by a secret agreement with the Olmiitz knyazh and the orthodox supreme Tsar in St. Petersburg,0 the Russians' subordinate knyazd in Sans-Souci312

has pledged his word to put 40,000 Prussians into Bohemia to keep the people there in subjection and as reserves against the Hun- garians. This was spoken of openly even in the St. Paul's Church.6 It was impossible to persuade even the deputies of the Centre and part of those of the Right in Berlin to keep silent about it. They were therefore dispersed.

But that is not all: the Berlin National-Zeitung reported from Berlin on May 1:

[^1]: We have just learned from a very reliable source: "Yesterday morning the Management Board of the Upper Silesian Railway received a telegram from the Minister of the Interior that 30,000 Russian soldiers would be transferred from Cracow by means of the Upper Silesian Railway (consequently, from Cracow via Mislowitz, Kosel, Ratibor, Oderberg) to Austria. The Board of the Upper Silesian

[^2]: a Schiller, "Die Bürgschaft".—Ed.

[^3]: Francis Joseph I.—The Russian word "knyaz" means "Prince".—Ed. c Nicholas I.—Ed. d Frederick William IV.— Ed. e The German National Assembly met in the St. Paul's Church at Frankfurt.— Ed.





**[p. 395]**

That then is what we have come to: The Government of the imperial Russian subordinate knyaz in Potsdam not only issues warrants for the arrest of Kossuth, Bern and GÖrgey,b it even allows 30,000 Russian police agents to be sent by rail through Prussian territory to Hungary—and what is more, it sends 40,000 Prussian soldiers to Bohemia in order to hold down a people which has been contemptuously trampled under foot and which is thirsting for revenge!

Hear that, Rhinelanders! It is for this, therefore, that we are being subjected to the Russo-Prussian rule of violence, so that our sons and brothers, Rhinelanders like ourselves, shall be sent to Bohemia and perhaps to Hungary, in order that in the service of the Russian Tsar they will help to suppress the last people that is defending the revolution of 1848 arms in hand!

It is for this we were betrayed to Prussia in 1815, so that the disgrace would fall on us, too, for having allowed the Russians, with bands playing and banners flying, to be marched against the Magyar revolutionary army through our territory, through a country joined with us into a single state.

It was only by force that we became Prussian subjects and have remained Prussian subjects. We were never Prussians. But now, when we are being led against Hungary, when Russian robber bands are setting foot on Prussian territory, now we feel that we are Prussians, indeed we feel what a disgrace it is to bear the name of Prussian!

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 3, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 289, time May 4, 1849

[^3]: a National-Zeitung No. 116 (supplement), May 2, 1849.— Ed. b See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 269-70 and this volume, pp. 257-58.— Ed.





**[p. 396]**

[FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR]

Cologne, evening of May 3. As the flight of the imperial troops from Hungary becomes ever wilder, and the pursuit by the Magyars more inexorable, so much the more confused and contradictory become the reports on events in the theatre of war. They agree only in one respect: that the imperial troops are daily suffering fresh defeats.

The following facts, however, emerge as pretty well certain:

Firstly: The battle at Acs, which the imperial forces depicted as a victory, was a defeat. This follows from the fact that Schlick, who claims to have won a victory here, immediately afterwards retreated to Raab. The Lithographierte Correspondent, too, states that the outcome of the encounter at Acs proved to be disadvantageous for the imperial troops, and that the Zanini regiment, apart from a few officers, went over to the Hungarians.

Secondly: On April 28, in the region of Hungarian Altenburg (halfway between Raab and Pressburg), the Austrians were defeated again. Various reports concur in stating this. Many wounded were brought across the Leitha and the whole surrounding area is crowded with them. On the 29th and 30th, some 2,000 are said to have been brought to Vienna itself. Some say that Welden's headquarters is in Pressburg, others that it is in Brück on the Leitha (on Austrian soil). At Raab, too, where Schlick is supposed to have been on the 27th, the pursuing Hungarians are said to have engaged him in a murderous battle.

From this news it would appear that the bulk of the Austrian army has already been driven out of Hungary. And it is beyond doubt that it is for the most part already on Austrian soil, and in Hungary it merely occupies Pressburg and Oedenburg. In addition, what we



**[p. 397]**

Thirdly: It is practically certain that Jellachich, too, has been completely defeated. He himself, as the Wiener Zeitung reports, has already arrived in Esseg, which means that, since he only left Pest on the 23rd or 24th, and was already in Esseg on the 26th, he has made a much quicker journey than his corps. It is said that this corps has been completely destroyed and that the greater part of the survivors have gone over to the Magyars. According to one report, the batde took place at Kis-Bér, but this is impossible since this place, situated a few miles south of Komorn, is quite outside Jellachich's route. Apart from that this report contains also various other impossibilities. The news of Jellachich's defeat, however, appears in all newspapers and correspondents' reports.

A manifesto issued by Kossuth proclaims the independence of Hungary and its neighbouring territories from Austria and declares the separation of these territories from the Habsburg- Lorraine dynasty because the latter unleashed such a calamitous war against Hungary?13

From the south, no news has come of further advances of the Magyars. Perczel is said to have moved with his main army towards Pest. Rukavina has asked for help from the Serbs in order to fortify Temesvar, but the Serbs have refused it. On the contrary, they are demanding the immediate convocation of the Serbian National Assembly for election of the voivode and constitutional establish- ment of the Voivodina.

The Hungarians are said to have obtained 80,000 rifles from England via Turkey. The Grosswardein factory supplies them with 300 daily.

Meanwhile, in Vienna joy and excitement prevail among the people, and consternation in the Government. On April 30, indescribable despondency was evident on the Stock Exchange. Petty traders came from the suburbs and gave accounts of mounting unrest. In the afternoon, well-known barricade personalities were noticed in the streets.

The Government is in the throes of complete break-up. Not only has Stadion resigned, but it is already the turn of Schwarzenberg, who is to be replaced by Colloredo-Waldsee.

The Russians are coming. The Russian General von Berg has already travelled via Cracow to Vienna. 12,000-15,000 Russians of all



**[p. 398]**

The Russians have already marched into the Bukovina, according to a note from Czernowitz of April 28.

(The Viennese and Prague newspapers have not reached us this evening.)

Written by Engels on May 3, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 289, time May 4, 1849

[^1]: a Nicholas I.— Ed.





**[p. 399]**

[NEWS FROM SOUTHERN GERMANY]

Cologne, May 3. We have today received several letters from various parts of Southern Germany; they are all unanimous in conveying the heartening news that everywhere the people are impatiendy awaiting the moment when they can at last confront the barefaced counter-revolution of the rulers "by the grace of God" and their worthy accomplices with a genuine revolution—not like that of March—and avenge the acts of violence and infamy that, day after day, for so long have been perpetrated against the people's rights. Everywhere the people are organising themselves into companies, electing leaders, providing themselves with arms and ammunition etc. It is particularly encouraging, however, to learn that the spirit prevailing amongst the majority of the military there precludes the possibility of once again setting the soldiers like murderous dogs and wild beasts upon their brothers and making them run amuck against their own flesh and blood.

The justified anger of the people has reached a level that makes an imminent outbreak appear inevitable. It is to be hoped that this time the storm will rage so mightily through all Germany that at last the whole pack of divinely appointed martial-law addicts, robber knights and traitors to the people will be uprooted utterly and finally from German soil.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 3, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the supplement to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 289, May 4, 1849

[^3]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 400]**

NEWS FROM HUNGARY

Cologne, May 4. We have received the following reports from Vienna dated May 1:

In the concluding days of last month, and especially yesterday, April 30, an unusual amount of activity could be observed in the streets of the capital. There was general excitement as the news spread about the withdrawals of troops from the Hungarian border. Evidence of the heavy losses and defeats sustained by the Austrian side is provided by the continuous transports of maimed and wounded, who for the past two days have been coming, brought in hundreds of carts, to the military hospitals in Vienna. The latter are already so full that all the corridors and the spaces between the beds are being used to accommodate patients. The men brought back under these conditions are in a wretched state, which cannot but remind one of Napoleon's retreat from Russia—pale, emaciated, tattered apparitions, their wounds are covered with makeshift bandages of rags, they lie on the bare planks of the carts. One cannot look upon this picture of suffering without shedding tears of pity. The majority of the wounded received incurable fatal injuries—many losing their noses and chins—in the course of the Hungarian cavalry attacks. In short, it is impossible to describe how badly these poor devils have been mauled. In addition, ten carts laden with caps of all branches of the service, together with cavalry harness, arrived here yesterday, followed by about 500 unmounted horses which had lost their riders in the batde.

[^1]: Altogether, things look very bad for the Austrian cause in Hungary; a week ago the royal imperial troops were still in Pest, and now their headquarters has been in Oedenburg for several days already; the Austrian army is no longer withdrawing but is in full flight; the Oedenburg supply column has just arrived with soldiers of all branches of the service and military baggage. I met a sergeant-major I know who belongs to an Upper-Austrian regiment formerly stationed in Vienna. According to his account there can be no doubt about the Hungarians' victory, since the latter are taking advantage of the Austrian troops' utter confusion, allowing them no time to rally, but continually attacking with fresh energy and forcing them to fall back. The Hungarian army is far superior to them and is fanatically devoted to its cause, whereas the Austrians, as a result of fatiguing and poindess marches, discouraging losses and setbacks, and as a result of bad leadership having been left in the lurch at decisive moments by their officers, are naturally not defending the cause of the dynasty with the necessary determination. The ignorance displayed by the royal imperial generals





**[p. 401]**

On Sunday, April 29, there was a big battle near Wieselburg, with the Austrian losses amounting to 6,000 dead and wounded — so that there are grounds for believing that a sensational defeat has been suffered, and that this accounts for the transports of the wounded.

The army corps commanded by the Ban3 is thought to have been completely routed.

The Hungarian insurgents have advanced with a force numbering 15,000 men and 30 pieces of ordnance north-westward into the Turocz comitat and at present hold the county town, St. Martin, as well as Mossocz. It is said they intend to cross the Waag, to occupy the Kisuca valley and block the roads from Silesia and Galicia.

In St. Martin, from which town the Slovakian Landsturm received many volunteers, there is said to be great fear that vengeance will be meted out by the insurgents. Slovakia, too, seems to be falling very much under Magyar influence.

In Pressburg on the 29th the post from Pest failed to arrive for the fourth day in succession. In the heath on the outskirts of the town earthwork and redoubts are being built.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 4, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 291, May 6, 1849 time

[^3]: a Jellachich.— Ed.





**[p. 402]**

LONGING FOR A STATE OF SIEGE

Cologne, May 5. It is still being rumoured that on Sunday, on the occasion of the district congresses of the various parties,314 a state of siege will once again be imposed on the good city of Cologne.

From all kinds of small preparations by the military authorities, it is clear that at any rate they are preparing themselves for all eventualities. That is not all. Measures are being taken which definitely indicate a desire to provoke disturbances.

Why otherwise has "My glorious army"315 been suddenly permit- ted, to the great astonishment of the soldiers themselves, to remain out of barracks until 10 p.m. instead of 9 p.m.?

There is likewise again talk of arrests. We are quite ready to believe in it. The desire for such action has been in existence for a long time. Moreover, it is known that already on one occasion by means of such arrests the plan of provoking disorders proved completely suc- cessful.

We repeat, it is of the utmost importance that the democrats, and especially the workers, of Cologne do everything possible so that tomorrow the powers that are eager for a state of siege will not be given even the slightest excuse that will serve them as a cover for their acts of violence.

It is primarily the bourgeoisie that is endangered by the latest counter-revolutionary actions. The bourgeoisie has convened the congress of the towns. Let the bourgeoisie have the honour of saying the first word. Let us wait to see what these gentlemen will decide on Tuesday. We are convinced that many a worthy democrat will be greatly disappointed by the results of this pompous "congress of the towns".3

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 392.— Ed.





**[p. 403]**

If tomorrow the workers allow themselves to be provoked into disorders they will only be pulling the chestnuts out of the fire for the bourgeoisie, and at the same time for the Government. The question is whether they wish to be used for this purpose at a time when all Germany is on the threshold of civil war, and when perhaps they will soon have the opportunity to come forward with their own demands.

Written by Engels on May 5, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 291, May 6, 1849 time



**[p. 404]**

[THE SITUATION IN HUNGARY]

Apart from the news received from our Vienna correspondent (see under Cologne3) there is a complete lack of definite information about the events in the theatre of war. We are therefore restricting ourselves today to a few items of news from the Hungarian- Moravian border that clearly bear the imprint of fear of the Magyars.

The Constitutionelles Blatt aus Böhmen writes:

"From the Galician-Silesian border, April 28. The outcome of the clash near Neutra is that the Magyars have penetrated into the Zips as well as into the north-western foot-hills of the Carpathians. Neumarkt, Budatin and Sillein are in their hands. For some days they have been threatening the passes near Csacze and Jablunka, whither the imperial observation corps has been withdrawn. To avert a Magyar invasion of Silesia, an infantry division has been sent to Csacze, the infantry division stationed at Bielitz since last January has been moved to Jablunka, and, finally, a battalion has been withdrawn from Troppau and stationed in the neighbourhood of Friedek.—Since the day before yesterday fleeing Slovaks have been passing through Saybusch and Andrichau; the Imperial Commissioner from Sillein has been in Teschen for the last four or five days.

In another report from Silesia published by the same paper it is stated:

[^1]: "The day before yesterday (the 26th) brisk artillery fire coming from the direction of Sillein or Teplitz could be heard in Saybusch until 6 o'clock in the evening.— How- ever, only those who regard the recent occurrences in Cracow and Görgey's simultaneous advance as parts of a co-ordinated plan think it likely that the Magyars will pay a visit to Galicia."b

[^2]: "From Karwin, a small Prussian town, about two hours' journey from Troppau, reports have been received that from the castletower many beacons could be observed

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 400-01.— Ed. b This and the following quotations are taken from the Constitutione lies Blatt aus Böhmen No. 103, May 1, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 405]**

"A host of insurgents, about 15,000 in number, most of them horse-, cattle- and swine-herdsmen, conscripted from their pusztas for the war, and accompanied by several cannon, are said to have advanced up to St. Martin and, on the evening of the same day, even as far as Sillein (about 2 % post stages from Jablunka). Counts Pongrâcz and Révay, the royal commissioners, fled to avoid death at the hands of the Magyars; Major Wenk crossed to this side of the Waag and called on all the imperial garrisons stationed in Slovakia to concentrate at certain frontier points so as to maintain communications with Moravia and Silesia.

"The borders are manned and all men in the towns and villages capable of bearing arms have been mustered for the Landsturm that is to go into action under the command of Archducal Justiciary Peter in the event of an invasion by the Magyars.— Kossuth's supporters are doing all they can to make the Slovaks waver. Thus, a song is going the rounds in which every Slovak loyal to the King, a 'German alien', is called a traitor to his country; some people are unfortunately led astray by this and have been ensnared. These are the bitter fruits of a mistaken policy pursued by a military leader3 who let himself be lulled to sleep by the perfidious Magyar nobility, and whose anti-national measures repressed a people prepared to sacrifice everything in order to humble the Magyars (!?!)."

From Ofen we learn that the garrison left behind by the imperial troops is thought to consist of four infantry battalions, two to three cavalry squadrons and 83 well-manned pieces of ordnance. The fortress has provisions for six weeks.

[^1]: Written by Engels about May 5, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 291, time May 6, 1849

[^3]: a Windischgrätz.— Ed.





**[p. 1849]**

[FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR]

The Hungarians continue to advance. They are said to have already made incursions into Styria (near Fürstenfeld on the Raab), into Moravia (near Friedland on the Jablunka) and Galicia (near Raycza on the Moravian border). On the 29th Raab was still in the hands of the imperial troops; since then it is thought to have been abandoned. Pressburg was fortified by the imperial troops; accord- ing to some reports it has already been evacuated.

In the south, the imperial troops must be in a bad way. They are said to be evacuating Fünfkirchen, between the Danube and the Drava. Jellachich's corps, it now appears, was completely scattered, and two regiments of Croats were taken prisonerand put into the ranks of the Hon- veds. A report also mentions the encirclement and capture of Simunich.

Bern's troops are really in the Banat, near Lugos and Karânsebes and are threatening the fortresses of Arad and Temesvar.

The rumours about the expansion of the Magyar army are beginning to assume fantastic proportions. They say that 250,000 Magyars are under arms. While Görgey was fighting Wohlgemuth with a force of 45,000, 18 battalions attacked Jellachich, and in addition to this, Dembinski's corps, the strongest of all, has not been in action since the battle of Kapolna. Guyon and Klapka are now in command at Raab. The Hungarian Assembly has been convoked for May 10 in Pest. The Russians, 8,000 strong, are said to have entered Cracow.

[^1]: Written by Engels about May 5, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 291 (second edition), May 6, time





**[p. 407]**

[KOSSUTH'S PROCLAMATION]

We are publishing the following passages from a proclamation by Kossuth, dated Gödöllö, April 7, and taken from the Neue Oder-Zeitung:

"The nation's valiant army has driven out that enemy whose traitorous commissioners in Nograd and Somogy had once more started to subject the people to the yoke of labour services which had been abolished by law and which we shall never permit to be inflicted on you again. It has driven out the enemy who in the past month issued an imperial decree that where the terrier has been abolished, the tenant has to pay half the value of the abolished labour services and tithes out of his own pocket, although the Hungarian law exempted you from this payment It is our firmest resolve to uphold this law in defence of your freedom.

[^1]: "Our valiant army is driving from your borders the enemy whose Emperora dared to state: 'Hungary does not exist and will never again exist', and who dared to partition us from our brothers in Transylvania, to tear Croatia from Hungary, to cut up our own fatherland and to turn our most fertile regions into a special Rascian Kingdom, for the benefit of those Rascian robbers with whom he did not scruple to ally himself for the purpose of exterminating the Hungarian nation.

[^2]: "Our valiant army is driving from your borders the enemy who, wherever he went in his flight, robbed like a common highwayman, who, not content with stealing as much as he could eat and drink, destroyed and laid waste what he was unable to consume, in order to leave famine in his wake; what is more, with inhuman ferocity and out of sheer predatory, malignant instincts he snatched the pillows from under the heads of your children, scattering the feathers to the winds. He did not even spare your churches; he tore the marble slabs from the altars, gutted the roofs of the chapels, while some of the officers stole the silver spoons horn those who gave them food: thus behaves the enemy that the Austrian Emperor sent to our country, to destroy it, to exterminate our nation, and to make our people slaves and beggars!

[^3]: "I prophesied to you months ago that Hungary's freedom, autonomy and independence would blossom out of the tyranny of the Austrian Emperor.

[^4]: "And, thank God, it is so. Praised be the holy name of the Lord for this, and the nation's blessing and eternal thanks also to the valiant Hungarian army, to those who

[^5]: a Francis Joseph I.—Ed.





**[p. 408]**

"That is a characteristic piece of cowardice, for only a coward is capable of lying. The enemy deceived you with lying reports that he had driven our troops out of Transylvania, that Jellachich had taken Szegedin by storm, although he never came anywhere near it.

"Yes, and what is more—now that the enemy has been defeated four times within five days, and forced out of his strongest position, Windischgrätz, Schlick and Jellachich with their whole army in flight from Poroszlo, Pest and Waitzen—now, while I am writing this in Gödöllö, in the very same room where 24 hours ago Windischgrätz dared to dream of Hungary's subjugation—now, whilst his whole defeated army is on the run and we have snatched the whole of Transylvania, two-thirds of Hungary, from the tyrant's clutches—even now he is still not ashamed of spreading the lies in the venal Pest journals that he won a victory near Jasz-Bereny. To remove any doubt in the matter, I give you—my brothers, my friends!—the comforting assurance that I and the splendid leaders of our heroes are in Gödöllö with our army, whither our intrepid Honveds fought their way at bayonet's point. We are in Gödöllö from whose outskirts our artillerymen went into action, shelling the arrogant enemy out of his positions; in Gödöllö from whose outskirts our hussars pursued the fleeing enemy up to the Danube at Pest.—And over there in Transylvania the imperial enemy no longer exists. This Emperor sent the wild Muscovites against us, but Bern and our Hungarian army in Transylvania expelled the enemy and his Muscovite protectors, down to the last man, from the sacred soil of Transylvania.

[^1]: "And down in the Bacska, Perczel took St. Tamas whose capture cost so much blood on other occasions. And he liberated Peterwardein, which was enmeshed by Austrian treachery, and freed the prosperous Alföld from the Rascian robbers. But up here, where the enemy's main force planned to subjugate Hungary, Commander- in-Chief Görgey with his generals Damjanich, Aulich, Klapka and Gaspar defeated Schlick near Hatvan, Jellachich near Tapio-Bicske, Windischgrätz and Schlick rejoined by Jellachich near Isaczeg; and now that they and our victorious troops have taken Gödöllö, they are already standing on the Rakos plain. A few more days, and Hungary will be free and no wicked enemy will violate the soil of our fatherland.

[^2]: "This is the joyful news I give you, my brothers! Long live the free Hungarian fatherland!"

[^3]: Written by Engels about May 7, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^4]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 292, May 8, 1849 time





**[p. 409]**

FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR

The Austrian army continues to retreat. On April 28 Raab was evacuated; on the 29th, the Hungarian outposts had reached Hochstrasse, two miles3 from Wieselburg. On the other side of the Danube, the Austrian corps stationed near Dioszeg has also withdrawn to Lanschiitz (4 hours from Pressburg). Even on the 30th one could not travel from Pressburg further than Karlsburg (one and a half miles from Pressburg, on the southern bank).

The Austrian High Command is in Laxenburg, IV2 hours from Vienna.

Slovakia is now completely in the hands of the Hungarians who were welcomed with open arms by the inhabitants. The Hungarians have found a mass of weapons there since Windischgrätz had disarmed the rural population and the confiscated rifles were collected and piled up in the county towns. There is no sign of the Slovak Landsturm; Bloudek has disappeared, the guerilla command- er Janiczek has gone over to the Magyars. From Slovakia the Hungarians threaten Moravia, Austrian Silesia and Galicia. There is talk of an invasion corps numbering 40,000-60,000 men to transfer the theatre of war to Russian and Prussian Poland. A surprise attack on Prerau, the junction of the Polish-Silesian-Austrian railway lines, must certainly be expected.

In connection with the sudden stoppage in the advance of the Russians, we refer to our report from Breslau.b It is true that there is still talk about a large Russian corps advancing on Transylvania; for the present, however, all these reports are unreliable.

[^1]: a See footnote on p. 20.— Ed. b "Breslau, 4. Mai", Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 292, May 8, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 410]**

Jellachich, whose defeat has been repeatedly confirmed, has been appointed commander with full authority over the Southern Army (Croatian-Slavonian-Banat) that is being formed.

This "Southern Army" consists on paper of 30,000 men; in actual fact it numbers at the most 8,000 plus a few thousand men from Serbian robber bands.

Written by Engels about May 7, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 292, May 8, 1849 time



**[p. 411]**

[THE PRUSSIAN ARMY AND THE REVOLUTIONARY UPRISING

OF THE PEOPLE]

Cologne, May 7. The elements now in ferment in Germany are daily becoming more distinct; the situation is becoming more firmly defined.

While one of the centres of the German counter-revolution, Austria, has its hands more than full in dealing with Hungary, the other centre, Prussia, is sending its armed hordes in all directions against the revolutionary uprising of the people.

In Dresden, that patient town of art and luxury, the people are taking up arms and replying with barricades and musket-fire to the traitorous proclamations of the royal Government.319 The greater part of the troops are coming over to the side of the people; the struggle is as good as decided; but suddenly Prussian battalions appear and side with the royal traitor2 against the people.

In the Palatinate, too, the people are taking up arms against the daily more insolent Bavarian counter-revolution; here, too, Prussian battalions stand ready in order to invade at a suitable moment and put an end both to the Frankfurt Assembly and to the uprising in the Palatinate.

In whatever direction one looks in North and South-West Germany, everywhere there are Prussian battalions ready to carry through the counter-revolution by force of arms.

And so that there should be no lack of Prussian battalions, whether in our country or in neighbouring states, recruiting into the army reserve is taking place everywhere5 in accordance with our glorious military organisation.

[^1]: a Frederick Augustus II.—Ed. b See this volume, pp. 195-96.— Ed.





**[p. 412]**

The Dresden Provisional Government is still in existence and rallies the forces of the people in the whole country.

The Palatinate Defence Council320 is still in existence and every day more and more people of the Palatinate gather around the banner of the revolution.

Finally, in Rhenish Prussia, the army reserve is refusing to march. Even in Elberfeld, in black-and-white3 Wuppertal, the army reserve is refusing to move beyond its place of assembly.

And lastly, in Austria the most important occurrence is the Hungarian revolution which is irresistibly advancing. The post from Vienna has not arrived—perhaps because the Magyars have torn up the Moravian railway line. That they have broken into Moravia is definitely established. Reports in writing from Ratibor inform us that already eight days ago bombardments from whole batteries were heard in Golkowitz on the Austrian frontier, and on May 3 in Loslau, and likewise in Prussian Upper Silesia. At all events, the battles must have taken place on this side of the Jablunka.

Incidentally, the victory of the Hungarians is more certain than ever before. It is quite definite that the Russians will not come. A few more days, therefore, and the Hungarians will be in Vienna, the Hungarian revolution will have been accomplished and the second German revolution will be ushered in in the most magnificent way.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 7, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 292, time May 8, 1849

[^3]: a The colours of the Prussian monarchy.— Ed.





**[p. 413]**

[A QUESTION TO THE WORKERS]

Cologne, May 7. The Prussian gentlemen seem to be making every effort to provoke a riot.

The day before yesterday the artillerymen (concerning whom, incidentally, the Government is labouring under a great illusion) were paid 15 silver groschen per man as a "supplement" for the previous month. True, the infantry also received this supplement.

The officers of one regiment stationed here have directly called on their soldiers to start a riot tomorrow.

This evening a scuffle between soldiers and civilians has already taken place on Neumarkt Square.

Once more we ask the workers whether they want to let the Prussian gentlemen dictate the moment for the uprising?

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 7, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 292, time May 8, 1849





**[p. 414]**

THE TSAR AND HIS SUBORDINATE KNYAZES3

Cologne, May 8. It is said that the French ambassadorb in Berlin has protested against the entry of the Prussians into Saxony.

At last, therefore, the French Government has noticed that the East-European counter-revolution menaces it as well, and that the new Holy Alliance 321 has as its ultimate, supreme aim nothing other than the conquest, and this time, perhaps, the partition of France.

We know positively that in the treaty which has been concluded between the orthodox Tsar and his two subordinate knyazes from Olmütz and Potsdamc the ultimate aim of the alliance is declared to be the conquest of France, the abolition of the Republic and the elevation of the "legitimate King", the "son of holy Louis", the idiot Henry of Bordeaux to the throne of France and Navarre.

That Odilon Barröt is involved in this plot is hardly doubtful. This is what they expect you to do, Prussian soldiers of the army reserve! You are being called away from your hearths and homes, from your wives and children, in order first of all to fight against your brothers in Germany and Prussia, to help in suppressing the small remnant of the freedom which you won last year—and then to fight against the Hungarians who are coming to the aid of your threatened freedom—and when you have completed this work to the satisfaction of your knyazes and your supreme lord and master, Tsar Nicholas, then you will be led across the Rhine against the nation whose heroic uprisings in 1789-94, 1830, and 1848 procured you all the freedoms you enjoy.

[^1]: a "Knyaz" is the Russian word for "prince".—Ed. b F. V. E. Arago.— Ed. c The Austrian Emperor Francis Joseph and the Prussian King Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 415]**

Written by Engels on May 8, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 293, May 9, 1849 time



**[p. 416]**

[THE APPROACHING REVOLUTION]

Cologne, evening of May 8. The revolution is drawing nearer and nearer. While in Dresden the people are displaying the utmost courage in their struggle against the Saxon and Prussian mer- cenaries,322 and armed reinforcements are pouring in from all quarters to repulse the Prussian invasion; while in the Palatinate the people are rallying round the Defence Council,323 the people's militia is mobilising and arming itself, the military are siding with it and the government officials are acquiescing, the whole of Germany is seething with unrest. Franconia is only waiting for the moment when it, too, can break away from Bavaria; the people there are in a state of great unrest, and the peasantry especially wait with impatience the outbreak of the struggle. We shall be in a position to supply details about this tomorrow. In Baden and Württemberg even the military have declared themselves in favour of the imperial Constitution. Similar reports have been received from Thuringia, Hesse-Cassel and Darmstadt.

Finally in Prussia the movement is gaining momentum with every day that passes and becoming more revolutionary. Breslau is in a state of profound unrest; the minor riots, the mustering of troops, the patrols, the groups of people gathering in the streets, are all harbingers of graver events. The whole of Silesia is in a similar state of tension in anticipation of the news from Hungary and Vienna. Berlin is quiet, held down by the rule of the sabre. On the Rhine and in Westphalia the plans of Hohenzollern despotism are miscarrying because of the resistance of the army reserve which refuses to allow itself to be used as a tool for new coups d'état. The whole of the Berg Country, the District of Hagen, Mülheim an der Ruhr, Krefeld—in



**[p. 417]**

The Brandenburg-Manteuffel clique is in the meantime doing its best to provoke the people into revolution. The Staats-Anzeiger* which arrived today contains a circular addressed to all heads of provincial administrations, calling on them to take energetic measures against all "revolutionary" activities in support of the imperial Constitution, and also correspondence between Imperial Commissioner Bassermann and Herr Brandenburg in which the latter states: 1) Prussia refuses once and for all to recognise the imperial Constitution, and 2) the Central Authority324 is to abstain from interference in Prussia's internal affairs, such as dissolution of the Chamber, proclamation of a state of siege etc., once and for all.

We commend these last samples of Hohenzollern arrogance to the people of the Rhine. It seems that through its contemptuous dismissal of even the most trivial concessions the dynasty intends to drive the people into revolution.

If it comes to another revolution, Herr von Hohenzollern, who knows whether the people will leave it at "Hats off!" this time!™

Written by Engels on May 8, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^1]: First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 293, time May 9, 1849

[^2]: Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger No. 125, May 8, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 418]**

THE DEEDS OF THE HOHENZOLLERN DYNASTY326

Cologne, May 9. It seems that in the last days of its existence and of the existence of the Prussian state, the Government of Herr von Hohenzollern wants once again to justify to the full the ancient reputation of the Prussian and Hohenzollern name.

Who does not know the description in Heine's poem:

A child with a head as large as a pumpkin, With the drooping moustache of a grey-haired bumpkin, With spider-like arms, lengthy but strong, With the paunch of a giant but guts not so long, A changeling3

Who does not know the treacheries, the perfidies, the legacy- hunting, by means of which that family of corporals which bears the name of Hohenzollern rose to greatness?

It is well known that the so-called "Great Elector"0 (as though any "Elector" could ever be "great"!) perpetrated the first betrayal of Poland when he, Poland's ally against Sweden, suddenly went over to the side of the Swedes in order to be able to plunder Poland more thoroughly by the Peace of Oliva.327

People are well acquainted with the absurd figure of Frederick I and the brutal coarseness of Frederick William II.

It is well known that Frederick II, inventor of patriarchal despotism, the friend of Enlightenment with the help of flogging, sold his country by auction to the highest bidders among French entrepreneurs; it is well known that he allied himself with Russia and

[^1]: a Heinrich Heine, "Der Wechselbalg" in Zeitgedicht.—Ed. b Frederick William.—Ed.





**[p. 419]**

It is well known that Frederick William II helped to accomplish the rape of Poland and that he gave away the stolen Polish national and church estates to his courtiers.

It is well known that in 1792 he entered into a coalition with Austria and England to suppress the glorious French Revolution and invaded France; it is likewise well known that his "glorious army" was most ignominiously driven out of France.

It is well known that he then left his allies in the lurch and hastened to conclude a peace with the French Republic.329

It is well known that, while pretending to be enthusiastically in favour of the legitimate King of France and Navarre,3 he bought the crown jewels of this same king for a song from the French Republic and thus profited from the misfortune of his "dear brother".

It is well known that he, whose whole life was a typical Hohenzollern mixture of opulence and mysticism, senile lascivious- ness and infantile superstition, trampled on the free expression of opinions by means of the Bischoffswerder edicts.330

It is well known that his successor, Frederick William III, the "Just", betrayed his old allies to Napoleon in exchange for Hanover, thrown to him as a bait.

It is well known that immediately after this he betrayed Napoleon to these same former allies, when being in the pay of England and Russia he attacked the French Revolution embodied in the person of Napoleon.

It is well known what the result of this attack was: the unprecedented defeat of the "glorious army" at Jena,331 the sudden outbreak of a moral sickness of the whole Prussian body politic, a series of acts of treachery, baseness and sycophancy on the part of Prussian officials from which Napoleon and his generals turned away in disgust.

It is well known that in 1813 Frederick William III, by fine words and magnificent promises, actually induced the Prussian people to believe that they were fighting a "war of liberation" against the French, although it was solely a matter of suppressing the French Revolution and restoring the old rule by the grace of God.332

It is well known that the fine promises were forgotten as soon as the Holy Alliance made its triumphant entry into Paris on March 30, 1814.

[^1]: a Louis XVI.— Ed.





**[p. 420]**

People recall the promises contained in the Act of Federation and the Vienna concluding document: freedom of the press, a Constitu- tion etc.334

It is well known how the "just" Hohenzollern kept his word. The Holy Alliance and congresses for the suppression of nations, Carlsbad decisions, censorship, police despotism, rule of the nobility, arbitrary bureaucratic rule, high-handed administration of justice by ministerial orders, persecution of demagogues, mass sentences, squandering of financial resources, and — no Constitution at all.335

It is well known that in 1820 the people were given a guarantee that taxes and state debts would not be increased, and how the Hohenzollern kept his word: by transforming the Overseas Trading Company into a secret loan bank for the state.336

It is well known how the Hohenzollern responded to the appeal of the French people during the July revolution: by massing troops on the frontier, by suppressing his own people, by crushing the movement in the smaller German states, and by the final enslave- ment of these states under the knout of the Holy Alliance.

It is well known that this same Hohenzollern violated neutrality during the Russo-Polish war337 by allowing the Russians to pass through his territory and thus to attack the Poles from the rear, by putting the Prussian arsenals and depots at the disposal of the Russians, and by affording every defeated Russian corps a safe refuge in Prussia.

It is well known that all the efforts of the Hohenzollern subordinate knyaz, in unison with the aims of the Holy Alliance, were directed towards strengthening the rule of the nobility, the bureaucracy and the army, and crushing by brute force all freedom of speech, all influence on the Government exerted by the "limited understanding of the subject"338 and moreover not only in Prussia but in the rest of Germany as well.

It is well known that there seldom has been a reign in which such praiseworthy intentions were implemented by more brutal and violent means than that of Frederick William III, particularly in 1815-40. Never and nowhere have there been so many arrests and sentences, never were the fortresses so filled with political prisoners, as under this "just" ruler. Moreover, it should be borne in mind what innocent simpletons these demagogues were.



**[p. 421]**

It will not be necessary. The data given suffice for a full characterisation of the Hohenzollern Prussian name. True, there was a moment when the splendour of this name was dimmed, but since the pleiad of Man teuf f el and Co.b surrounds the crown, the old grandeur has been revived. Once again, as formerly, Prussia is a vice-regal province under Russian supremacy; once again the Hohenzollern is a subordinate knyazoi the autocrat of all the Russias, and superior knyaz over all the little boyars of Saxony, Bavaria, Hessen-Homburg, Waldeck etc., once again the limited understand- ing of the subject is reinstated in its old right, that of obeying orders. "My glorious army", as long as the orthodox Tsarc himself is not making use of it, is allowed to establish in Saxony, Baden, Hessen, and the Palatinate the order which has prevailed for eighteen years in Warsaw, and in its own country and in Austria it is permitted to glue together the pieces of the shattered crowns with the blood of the subjects. We care as little about the word given earlier in a moment of fear and distress as did our deceased forefathers, and as soon as we have set our house in order we shall march with bands playing and banners flying against France and we shall conquer the land where the vines of Champagne grow, and we shall destroy the great Babylon, the mother of all sin!

Such are the plans of our august rulers; such is the safe harbour towards which our noble Hohenzollern is steering. Hence the ever more frequent dictates and coups d'état; hence the repeated kicks for the cowardly Frankfurt Assembly; hence the states of siege, arrests and persecutions; hence the intervention of the Prussian soldiery in Dresden and South Germany.

But there exists another power, to which, it is true, the gentlemen from Sans-Souci pay little heed, but which will nevertheless interpose

[^1]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed. b i.e. the members of the Brandenburg-Manteuffel Government.— Ed. c Nicholas I.— Ed.





**[p. 422]**

Written by Marx on May 9, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 294, May 10, 1849



**[p. 423]**

[THE SITUATION IN ELBERFELD]

"Elberfeld, May 8. After several posters appealing to the people to support the army reserve in their refusal of military duty, as well as a proclamation by the army reserve against the King3 and Government, had been torn down by the police, the latter were attacked and forced to fasten the posters to the offices and doors while the people watched them. Towards the evening, as the crowds grew larger and larger, the rumour spread that troops were on their way. And so the army reserve took up arms and forced the burgomaster to accompany them to the railway station to try and persuade the regular troops to turn back. However, when they were passing the officers' mess von Carnap took refuge in it and the people then demolished the building. Whilst the army reserve marched to the station to prevent the troops from entering the town, the armed forces appeared on the scene, causing confusion among the crowd and lashing out at diem to such an extent that a number of casualties had to be carried away.

(This morning artillery left Cologne at an early hour bound for Elberfeld, in order to riddle with grape-shot the honest workers of the Berg Country who are not willing to be used unlawfully as tools by a traitorous camarilla. We trust that the artillery will do its duty.)

[^1]: "But the crowd gathered again and went to the town hall where the civic militia had in the meantime been mounted to defend the building. It contains a great deal of ammunition, and the demand was raised that this should be handed over. After this demand had been refused, an attempt was made to force an entry, but this was unsuccessful. A hail of stones had in the meantime smashed several window-panes. At 8 o'clock this morning, the army reserve, fully armed, have taken up positions near Böttcher on Engelnberg where they await the arrival of the military.

[^2]: "Many proletarians armed with weapons have joined them, as well as army reserve units from other parts. The civic militia are equally active, but will not attack the army reserve and only control the crowd. If the military arrive and attack the army reserve, then alas! They will have to come in large numbers if they are to achieve anything." D. Z.b

[^3]: Written by Engels on May 9, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^4]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 294, May 10, 1849 time

[^5]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed. b Düsseldorfer Zeitung.— Ed.





**[p. 424]**

[FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR]

New victories are reported from the Hungarian border! The news about the defeat of the Austrians near Hochstrasse that we published a few days agoa has been fully confirmed. The island of Schutt is almost completely in the hands of the Magyars.

A second defeat has been sustained by the imperial troops near Szered on the Waag, about five milesb from Pressburg. Here Görgey fought his way across the Waag, driving the imperial troops nearly back to Pressburg.

In both these battles the Austrian cavalry in particular suffered heavy losses. Galician and German cavalrymen arrived in Vienna in carts and on foot, without their horses and sabres, often shouldering their saddles, their ragged, mud-stained and dejected appearance causing dismay amongst the black-and-yellowc supporters. The routed and ragged remnants of the Hurban corps also passed through Pressburg.

In this town general confusion prevailed among the imperial forces; they expected that a decisive battle would take place here on the 4th or 5th of May, and had given up hope of holding the town. Many black-and-yellow supporters fled from it.— Tyrnau, to the north-west of Szered, was also evacuated by the imperial troops and the railway line connecting it with Pressburg was torn up.

It is certain that the Magyars intend to make Moravia and Lower Austria the theatre of war, i.e. to take Vienna. Even the Vienna

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 409.— Ed. b See footnote on p. 20.— Ed. c The Austrian imperial colours.— Ed.





**[p. 425]**

In the Bukovina, the peasant agitator Kobylica is causing the Government increasing anxiety.

In the Bacska, Perczel is exacting heavy war-contributions from the Serbs who also have to raise recruits. But at the same time he has guaranteed their language and nationality and abolished the Military Border.343

The Austrian reports now maintain that the alleged deposing of the Habsburg dynasty was a bluff originating from the Austrian Government with the aim of inciting the other provinces against the Magyars. According to other sources the National Assembly revoked its decisions because of their adverse effect on the people. Se non è

vero è ben trovato?

In the south, according to the Vjestnik [B"ËCTHHKT>] and the Serbske Novine [Cpôc Ke HOBHHC], Perczel has crossed the Theiss, captured Kikinda District, forced the Serbs to retreat everywhere and now threatens Werschetz. Everyone there has fled to Pancsova. A corps is supposed to have advanced to the outskirts of Temesvar (whose capture by Bern is thus not confirmed). Bern is reported to have taken up his position near Orsova, ready to receive the Austrians and Russians advancing from Wallachia. The Serbs have completely lost their confidence in General Todorovich's conduct of the war. The South-Slav papers are unanimous in admitting that the Banat cannot be held and it will be completely reconquered by the Magyars in a few weeks' time.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 9, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the special supplement to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 294, May 10, 1849

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Even if it's not true it's well invented.— Ed.





**[p. 426]**

[COUNTER-REVOLUTIONARY OFFENSIVE AND VICTORY OF THE REVOLUTION]344

Cologne, May 9. The counter-revolution is advancing swiftly, but the revolution advances still faster.

While the counter-revolution has gained advantages in Dresden, which make its victory probable, and has managed to introduce a state of siege, censorship and martial law by successfully provoking a revolt in Breslau,345 the revolution can point to quite different victories.

We do not speak of the rapidly growing open rebellion of the army reserve in Rhenish Prussia, involving the most black-and-white3

districts, nor of the South-German movement, which is being betrayed everywhere by the governments, the bourgeoisie and the Frankfurt National Assembly ; we speak only of those great events which, coming from outside, can give strong support and unity to the small, isolated and deceived German movements — we speak of the Magyar and the French revolutions.

While the Magyar revolution is gaining one victory after another, and after the next decisive battle (which must have taken place on May 5 or 6 at Pressburg) will march directly on Vienna and liberate the city, France suddenly enters a stage when the movement is developing again openly and in broad daylight. The underground development of the past months comes to a close; the defeat of the French army at Rome347 has exposed and discredited the entire Government. The people reappears upon the scene — the people, the ultimate, supreme judge. Whether it happens at the elections or in the course of an open revolution, the French people will shortly

[^1]: a The colours of the Prussian monarchy.— Ed.



The European dynasties will soon see that the chosen people of the revolution has not changed; the French revolution of 1849 will speak to them, not in Lamartinian phrases, but in the language of guns.

Written by Engels on May 9, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the special supplement to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 294, May 10, 1849



**[p. 428]**

[THE UPRISING IN ELBERFELD AND DÜSSELDORF]348

Cologne, May 11. From Elberfeld we learn that after twice attacking the people, the soldiery drawn up on the market square were repulsed with several dead and wounded. The colonel of the 16th regiment had his horse shot from under him; he himself was severely wounded. Captain Uttenhoven is reported to have fallen, riddled with bullets in front and—behind (!); it is said that his own men fired at him. The soldiers' attack aroused the most tremendous fury. The majority of the civic militia fought on the side of the people.

The dissolved town council is said to have been replaced by a committee of public safety, and four members of the former council have joined it. The house of the chief burgomaster, von Carnap, was totally demolished; the mahogany furniture from the Hotel von der Heydt was used to build one of the most valuable barricades. A total of about 40 barricades is supposed to be in the town.

At the time of dispatch of this news which, however, cannot be vouched for in every point, the town had been evacuated by the troops, and large reinforcements from the surrounding districts were advancing to support the people of Elberf eld.

When the news that fighting had begun in Elberfeld reached Düsseldorf on the evening of the 9th, a truly heroic struggle was waged at Düsseldorf railway station against the troops who were being sent from Cologne to Elberfeld as reinforcements3; and there was soon fierce barricade fighting in all streets. The alarm tocsins were rung the whole night through, and the grape-shot fired by the military was answered by the bullets of the people. Towards morning, the soldiery gained the upper hand, however, and it is

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 423.— Ed.



reported that during the day posters were put up on the street corners proclaiming a state of siege and martial law.

There are thought to be about 20 dead among the casualties suffered by the people; they include the well-known forwarding agent Hartmann and a Polish painter who, after springing in front of the advancing soldiers and urging them not to fire on their brothers, was cut down by their bullets and fell dead to the ground.

The military are said to have later shot down defenceless men, women and children, thus marking their victory by even more bloodshed.

Written by Engels about May 10, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 295, time May 11, 1849



**[p. 430]**

THE NEW PRUSSIAN CONSTITUTION

Cologne, May 12. In November of last year, after the dispersal of the people's representatives, the Potsdam member of the Trinity,349

blessed by divine grace and the state of siege,3 imposed a Constitu- tion which was to be revised by the Chambers soon to be convened. As we know, the new representatives of the people suffered a fate similar to that of the old ones; the latter were dispersed by Wrangel's bayonets, the former received from Manteuffel a simple little notice of dissolution,350 ordering them to go home. That put an end, too, to the revision of the Constitution.

Thus the Christian-Germanic sovereign and his accomplices, the whole host of lay-abouts, parasites and vampires sucking the blood of the people, whether of high-born lineage or without ancestry, whether decorated with orders or undecorated, have acquired free scope for planting whatever kind of fruit they like.

In November of last year, the royalty, bureaucracy and junkers were still compelled to use various hypocritical statements and to accept articles of the Constitution which seemed very liberal. The November Constitution had to be framed in a way that would make it possible to ensnare the numerically large, stupid part of the so-called "Prussian people".

Now all such subtle diplomatic considerations have become superfluous. Is not brother-in-law Nicholas already on German soil with 20,000 men? Has not Dresden been demolished by artillery shelling? Does there not exist the closest alliance of Prussia with the cowardly fugitive in Königstein, with imperial Max in Munich,351

[^1]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 431]**

with the bulldog Ernest Augustus of Hanover, with the whole counter-revolutionary gang inside and outside Germany?

Certainly, this moment has been used by the Hohenzollern to the best advantage. He had a new Constitution drawn up for his "beloved" subjects, and he sanctioned and imposed it in Charlotten- burg on May 10.

The latest royal-Prussian Constitution, the only one sincerely intended, which also has the advantage over the November Constitution of consisting of only seventeen paragraphs, reads as follows:3

Written by Marx on May 12, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 297, May 13, 1849 time

[^1]: a There followed the "Verordnung über den Belagerungszustand" ("Decree on the State of Siege") of May 10, 1849, which the Neue Rheinische Zeitung published under the heading "The Latest Prussian Constitution".— Ed.





**[p. 432]**

THE SANGUINARY LAW IN DÜSSELDORF

Cologne, May 12. The "new Constitution", the abolition of ordinary laws and law-courts, together with the announcement of murderous privileges conferred by the sovereign3 on "My glorious army", already came into force in Düsseldorf yesterday.

After the defeat and massacre of the people, the commander immediately asked Berlin for instructions. From Herr von Hohen- zollern's accomplices, Brandenburg-Manteuffel, an order was re- ceived by telegraph to proclaim the sanguinary law and to set up murderous military courts.

By Articles 1 and 6 of the army orders the right of association is abolished, and Articles 5, 6, 7, 24, 25, 26, 27, and 28, of the imposed

when a state of siege was proclaimed the Düsseldorf press was put under censorship, a measure which gave rise to loud protests and great indignation even among the majority of the feeble Agreers' company. Today, after the new Hohenzollern achievements, when at the side of the subordinate knyaz in Potsdam there are no Chambers, but instead snub-nosed Cossack kinsmen, today the powers that be are not content with censorship, but proceed simply to suppression of the press.

According to Article 7, Düsseldorf newspapers, and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung as well, are prohibited in the Düsseldorf area. According to Article 8, nothing but official "information" may be published.

[^1]: "Schnaps" Charter352 are made invalid.

[^2]: Last year, under the rule of "citizen and communist" Drigalski,353

[^3]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 433]**

Article 9. Anyone who by word of mouth, in writing, in the press, or in representational form, incites resistance to the legal (!) orders of the authorities will come before a court martial.

Article 10. Anyone who is caught in open or armed resistance to the measures of the legal authorities, or who by traitorous action exposes the troops to danger or harm, will be summarily shot in accordance with martial law.

The laurels of the murderer Windischgrätz allow no rest to the reinvigorated Hohenzollern!

Written by Marx on May 12, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 297, May 13, 1849 time



**[p. 434]**

THE UPRISING IN THE BERG COUNTRY

Cologne, May 12. At the present time the attention of the entire Rhine Province is concentrated on Elberfeld, a place which is now raising the "banner of revolt" higher than any other Rhenish town.3

The dissolution of the Chamber354 was the signal for the movement in the otherwise so peaceful Wuppertal. The most addle-pated "wallers"355 and the most miserable "hypocrites" had to admit that the guilt of the reaction exceeded all bounds, and carried away by the enthusiasm of those courageous workers whose energy we have never doubted, they have taken up arms and joined the ranks of those heroes on the barricades who are resolved to wage a struggle to the death against the monarchy.

In view of the confused reports which reach us from the batde arena itself, it is impossible to separate the truth from the lies. This much at least seems certain: that the whole population has taken up arms, that streets and houses are barricaded, that from neighbouring places—Solingen, Remscheid, Gräfrath, from localities of the Ennepe highway, in short, from the entire Berg Country—armed reinforcements are hurriedly arriving. It seems certain, too, that the insurgents are already not restricting themselves to the occupation of Elberfeld and Barmen but are extending their measures of defence to the most important points of the environs.

It is confidendy asserted that the insurgents also plan to hasten to the aid of Düsseldorf in order to clear that city of Prussian troops. The army reserve, which now for the first time has definitely sided with the people, is playing the main role in these operations. The fighters do not lack munitions and money since several of the richest

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 423 and 428-29.— Ed.





**[p. 435]**

Under these circumstances, of course, it is not surprising that the royal mercenaries are getting ready to attack in order wherever possible to crush the people in the Berg Country as well and perpetrate the same atrocities as in Breslau, Dresden, Erfurt etc. It is to be hoped that this time things will turn out differendy.

The artillery parked at Wesel will move from there to Elberfeld. It is said that the attack has been fixed for next Monday.

We cannot vouch for these reports. But whatever the plans of the counter-revolution may be, Elberfeld will have to face a struggle in which it can truly perform a great service to our country.

Written by Marx on May 12, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 297, May 13, 1849 time



**[p. 436]**

[THE VENAL BASENESS OF THE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG}

Cologne, May 13. We draw our readers' attention to the recent issues of the Kölnische Zeitung, in particular to today's issue, that of Sunday, May 13.

Probably never before has the "most vulgar artlessness" gone so closely hand in hand with venal baseness as in the latest leading articles and reports of our admirable contemporary.

Only a few days ago, at the congress of the Rhenish municipal councils,356 we saw the owner of the Kölnische Zeitung, Herr Joseph Dumont, hastily rising to support the decisions adopted there. Today we see the same man, through his henchman Brüggemann, expressing in every line the most brutal pleasure at the failure of the revolts which were precisely the consequence of those decisions of the Rhenish municipal councils.

In return, however, the Kölnische Zeitunghas also the good fortune to be imposed on the Rhenish towns, together with the state of siege, as their sole newspaper.

Truly, what is being simultaneously imposed on these towns is blood and—dirt!

[^1]: Written by Marx on May 13, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 297 (second edition), May 13, 1849

[^3]: Published in English for the first time





**[p. 437]**

THE KREUZ-ZEITUNG

Cologne, May 15. The rascally Prussian newspaper does us the special favour of compiling an anthology of unpatriotic expressions published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung about the "imperial-Rus- sian subordinate knyaz in Olmütz" and the "Prussian bug-ridden knights".3 The selection is limited to the dispatches from Breslau and is accompanied at the end by the following outburst of indignation of the covertly frivolous "crusader":

"Compared to this Chimborazo insolence, how flat is the announcement of the wedding of the Prussian King published in the French Moniteurin 1793: ' Le jeune tyran de Prusse vient d'épouser une demoiselle de Mecklenbourg\"b

In order to complete as fully as possible the account of the "Chimborazo insolence" of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, we ask the rascally newspaper to be so good as to reprint the Premier-Cologne from No. 294 of our newspaper "The Deeds of the Hohenzollern Dynasty".0 We hear that Frau von Hohenzollernd is a zealous reader of the rascally sheet and we do not adopt so "exclusive" an attitude that we begrudge the respectable lady some historical studies on the family of her spouse for her amusement.

[^1]: Written by Marx on May 15, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 299, May 16, 1849 time

[^3]: a See this volume, pp.359 and 414.— Ed. b "The young tyrant of Prussia recently married a young lady of Mecklenburg." (From a report in the section "Berliner Zuschauer" published in the Neue Preussische Zeitung [Kreuz-Zeitung] No. 107, May 10, 1849.) A reference to Luise von Mecklenburg-Strelitz.— Ed.

[^4]: c See this volume, pp. 418-22. The Premier-Cologne—leading article datelined Cologne.—Ed.

[^5]: à Queen Elizabeth, the wife of Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 438]**

[A NEW PRUSSIAN KICK FOR THE FRANKFURT ASSEMBLY]

Cologne, May 15. No sooner had the Holy Alliance of the knout imposed a brand-new state-of-siege Constitution on Prussia3 than it favoured us today with a second document of no less interest. Those nationally-assembled milksops of Frankfurt, who by their radical philistinism, cowardice and doltishness so faithfully assisted the paid traitors of the German people for a whole year in working for the counter-revolution, are now reaping what they sowed.357 If it were possible for some glimmer of light to occur in the minds of our National Assembly deputies, and for their breasts to be filled not merely with indignation inspired by March beer, but at least with a small degree of revolutionary indignation and energy, then that ought to be effected by the following "royal order" of the subordinate knyaz in Charlottenburg358:

"Royal Order

[^1]: "We, Frederick William, by the grace of God King of Prussia etc. etc., hereby, on the proposal of our Ministry, order the following:

[^2]: § 1

[^3]: "The mandate of the deputies elected iiï the Prussian state to the German National Assembly on the basis of the Decrees of the German Confederation of March 30 and April 7, 1848, and of Our Order of April 11, 1848, has c e a s e d to be v a l i d .

[^4]: §2

[^5]: "This Our present Order is to be p u t before the deputies by Our Plenipotentiary in Frankfurt am Main for their g u i d a n c e and w i t h the

[^6]: a See this volume, pp. 430-31.— Ed.



"Given in Charlottenburg, May 14, 1849

Frederick William Count von Brandenburg, von Ladenberg, von Manteuffel,

von Strotha, von der Heydt, von Rabe, Simons"

Written by Marx on May 15, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 299, time May 16, 1849



**[p. 440]**

THE NEW MARTIAL-LAW CHARTER

[Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 299, May 16, 1849]

Cologne, May 15. We still have to report on the latest paternal intentions of the subordinate knyaz in Potsdam3 towards his "hereditary" subjects, acquired by plunder and traffic in people. We are referring to the newly imposed martial-law Charter* this sole true promise of all the Hohenzollern promises, in which Prussian glory is at last revealed even to the most stupid and credulous simpletons in its fullest natural nakedness, divested of the last traces of its hypocritical comedian's tinsel.

The dispersal of the inoffensive Berlin Chambers, which were supposed to "revise" the imposed Constitution of December 5, was only, as is well known, the necessary preparation for the Russians' entry into German territory. But the agreement arrived at between the Potsdam Bashkirs and the kindred dog-nosed Cossacks of the orthodox Tsar had another purpose besides that of the notorious Trinity's campaign against Hungary,359 in which Prussia, true to its cowardly, perfidious nature, stood at the gates like a police agent with orders for arrests, while the Austrian and Russian executioners were intended to institute the murder hunt within the country. The true aim of this Hohenzollern alliance was through the entry of the Russians to inspire the Potsdam hero with the necessary courage to take revenge on the revolution for the confession of cowardice wrung from him in March of last year.

We have no need to make excursions into history in order to prove the innate and natural cowardice of the Hohenzollerns at all times, nor perhaps do we even need to go back to the ancestors of this noble

[^1]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 430-31.— Ed.



at that time still considered a few liberal concessions to be necessary. The [Second] Chamber was dismissed when the conspiracy with the Russian Tsar and masterb had reached the desired conclusion. But only the actual entry of Russians into German territory, only the reliable proximity of the protecting Cossacks, gave the Hohenzollern the courage to come out with the latest plan: abolition of the last hypocritical "constitutional guarantees" by the introduction of the most unrestricted, most arbitrary sabre dictatorship, by the suspen- sion of the old, even the pre-March, laws and law-courts, by revenge with "gunpowder and lead" on the revolution for the cowardice of the Hohenzollerns proclaimed in the March concessions.

That is the historical origin of the recently imposed martial-law Constitution. Let us now look at its content.

Under Articles 1 and 2, "for the event of a disturbance" not only every commandant of a fortress can declare his fortress to be in a state of siege, but every "commanding general" can declare the whole area occupied by the army corps to be in a state of siege.

"For the event of a disturbance", c'est-à-dire, if the commandant or general sees fit to foresee the "event of a disturbance". Or is it possible that the Hohenzollern Ministers, in whose stylistic exercises the most remarkably abundant lack of grammatical knowledge usually predominates, intended to say: "in the event of a distur-

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 419.— Ed.

[^2]: b Nicholas. I.— Ed.





**[p. 442]**

"For the event of a disturbance", therefore, a commandant can declare his fortress, and a commanding general a whole province, to be in a state of siege. The limits of this "event" are not defined. Whether the "event of a disturbance" must show itself within the fortress or province or needs only threaten the fortress or province from a greater or lesser distance—that, too, will have to be decided only by the "tact" of the general or the commandant, and "tact", according to the weighty word of Lieutenant-General Tietzen, is the first requirement of a Prussian officer.

But the power of the general "for the event of a disturbance" has, on the other hand, been most remarkably restricted in the interests of all enthusiasts for the legal basis. Only "for the event of a war" are generals and commandants on their own initiative able to declare provinces and fortresses in a state of siege. "For the event of a disturbance", however, according to Article 2 of the new Charter, the proclamation of a state of siege emanates from the Ministry; "for this event" the commandant has the right to declare his fortress, and the general his province, in a state of siege only provisionally, subject to being confirmed or (!) rescinded by the Ministry. A pleasant safeguard for subjects threatened by a disturbance! Do we not have "responsible" Ministers? Is not the "legal basis" saved by the merely "provisional power" of the commandant's or general's dictatorship, by the existence of a final instance in the person of the "responsible" Minister? True, under Articles 7 and 13 the "provisional power" of the commandant or general gives them the right provisionally to suspend the ordinary law-courts, provisionally to set up courts martial, which then, likewise provisionally, pass death sentences (Article 8) and provisionally carry out the death sentences within 24 hours (Article 13, § 7). But the "legal basis" is always saved by the final confirmation of the "responsible" Minister — long live the legal basis! Our sole secret wish in this context is that the advocates of the legal basis should be the first to experience provisional execution in the name of God and His Majesty the Christian-Germanic subordi- nate knyaz.

Cologne, May 16. Cervantes somewhere talks about a worthy alguacil* and his clerk, who for the protection of public morality kept

[^1]: [Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 300, May 17, 1849]

[^2]: a A Spanish police agent.— Ed.





**[p. 443]**

Like these guardians of morality, the Prussian heroes of order have a simplified procedure for ensuring normal tranquillity under martial law. The provocative dispatch of some pillars of legality reeking of liquor, a few provocative sabre blows among the people, and the rebellious desires thereby aroused in some remote town or village provide an opportunity for proclaiming a state of siege and thus safeguarding the whole province against further improper disturbances and cheating it of its last remnant of constitutional rights.

Under Article 5 of the new martial-law Charter, on the proclamation of a state of siege the "military commander" can district by district invalidate Articles 5-7 and 24-28 of the latest "acquisitions" imposed in December.

Let us see what still remains when we subtract from the March promises the Articles abolished by the imposition of the new martial-law Charter. "For the event of a disturbance" by the arbitrary decision of a "military commander" there cease to exist:

As soon as a military commander proclaims a state of siege, "for the event of a disturbance", "freedom of the person" is no longer

[^1]: Article 5 of the December Constitution: "Freedom of the person is guaranteed." Article 6: "The home is inviolable." Article 7: "No one may be deprived of his legally appointed judge."

[^2]: Article 24: "Every Prussian has the right etc. freely to express his thoughts. " Article 25: "Offences committed by word of mouth, writing etc. are punishable in accordance with the general penal laws."

[^3]: Article 26: "If the author of a written work is known and within reach of the power of the court, the printer, publisher and distributor are not liable to punishment"

[^4]: Article 27: "All Prussians have the right to assemble peacefully and without weapons in closed premises."

[^5]: Article 28: "All Prussians have the right to unite in societies for purposes which do not contravene the penal laws."

[^6]: a M. Cervantes, "Coloquio de los perros" in Novelas ejemplares.— Ed.





**[p. 444]**

At the same time Article 4 of the new martial-law Charter lays down that

"with the proclamation of the state of siege" (pur et simple) "the executive power is transferred to the military commander, and the civil-administrative and municipal authorities must carry out the orders and commissions of the military commander".

By this paragraph all the usual forms of municipal and administrative government are safely abolished and the oxen of the snub-nosed, arrogant bureaucracy harnessed under the yoke of the sovereign military dictatorship as "lackeys for executing commis- sions".

Articles 8 and 9 contain the punishments by which the energetic Hohenzollern intends to defend his safety and order even when he is protected by bayonets and guns. This new penal law has at any rate the advantage of brevity over all the tediously agreed theories of law.

Article 8: "Anyone who in a place or region declared to be in a state of siege is guilty of deliberate arson, of deliberately causing an inundation" (what prudence!), "or who uses open violence and dangerous weapons to attack or resist the military forces or representatives of the civil and military authorities, will be punished by death."

"Resistance to the military forces or representatives of the authorities"! The deeds of "My glorious army" are well known; it is known also that the worthy Pomeranians, Prussians and Upper Silesian Poles, who in the interest of unity are being so zealously grafted into the Western provinces, following the example of His Majesty, derive their courage only from the circumstances and after having disarmed the citizens, as in Düsseldorf, Breslau, Posen, Berlin, and Dresden, they crown the state of siege by the murder of unarmed men, women and children.3 Hence the "hereditary" subjects of the Potsdam Bashkir knyaz are given the highlv commendable freedom, after a state of siege has been proclaimed, either to allow themselves to be "lawfully" murdered by the courageous executors of the benevolence of the sovereign, or by offering "resistance" to allow themselves to be shot in accordance with martial law.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 429 and 435.— Ed.





**[p. 445]**

Ought we to deal with the cowardly perfidy with which the Hohenzollern sovereign, and his accomplices Simons-von der Heydt-Manteuffel decree the formation of courts martial consisting of three "senior officers" and two civil judges appointedby the military commander, in order to preserve the semblance of "legal" procedure in the eyes of the stupid bourgeois and yet at the same time to be sure of a conviction owing to the preponderance in the number of military executioners?

Ought we to take note of the various provisions of Article 13 on "procedure at courts martial", in which there is nowhere any mention of the testimony of witnesses, but under which judgment can obviously be pronounced in the spirit of the murderer Windischgrätz "in accordance with the coincidence of cir- cumstances"?

Ought we to take note of the provisions that there is no appeal against sentences of courts martial, that death sentences are merely confirmed by the "military commander" and are carried out within twenty-four hours, and lastly that even after the lifting of the state of siege, in cases where sentences of courts martial have not yet been carried out, the "ordinary courts" can only convert the court-martial punishment into a legally imposed punishment, but must " accept the fact as proven" and cannot decide on the correctness or incorrectness of the charge?

Ought we, finally, to examine the last and best Article of this new Constitution which has been strengthened by the Cossacks, accord- ing to which "even apart from the state of siege", consequently "not for the event of a disturbance", Articles 5, 6, 24-28 of the December acquisition, "personal freedom", "inviolability of the home", "freedom of the press" and the "right of association" can be abolished district by district?

After all these splendid things there is no need for us to express our heartfelt good wishes to all well-intentioned Prussians on the new, solely true promises, on the finally true outburst of paternal benevolence resulting from the proximity of the Cossacks. We sincerely rejoice at this bloody castigation of the bourgeois who are so frantic for order, and of the miserable dolts who yearn for a basis of legality.



**[p. 446]**

The pitiful ranks of knights Will soon be riding off. They shall be offered a stirrup-cup From bottles of iron to quaff!a

Written by Marx on May 15 and 16, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung Nos. 299 and 300, May 16 time and 17, 1849

[^1]: Heinrich Heine, Deutschland. Ein Wintermärchen, Caput VIII.— Ed.





**[p. 447]**

[ELBERFELD]

Cologne, May 16. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung, too, was represented at the Elberfeld barricades.364

In order to refute various false rumours, we owe it to our readers to give them a brief report on this matter.

On May 10, Friedrich Engels, editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, went from Cologne to Elberfeld and took with him from Solingen two cases of cartridges which had been captured by the Solingen workers at the storming of the arsenal of Gräfrath. On arriving in Elberfeld, Engels made a report to the Committee of Public Safety on the situation in Cologne, and put himself at the disposal of the Committee. The military commission at once entrusted him with the management of fortification works by issuing the following author- isation:

On the following day the artillery too was put at his disposal.

[^1]: "The military commission of the Committee of Public Safety hereby empowers Herr Friedrich Engels to inspect all the barricades in the town and to complete the fortifications. All posts at the barricades are hereby requested to assist him wherever necessary.

[^2]: "Elberfeld, May 11, 1849 ( s i g n e d ) HUhnerbein, Troost"

[^3]: "Citizen F. Engels is hereby empowered to instal artillery at his discretion, and also to requisition the artisans necessary for this purpose, the costs involved being borne by the Committee of Public Safety.

[^4]: "Elberfeld, May 12, 1849

[^5]: Committee of Public Safety On behalf of which (signed) Pothmann, Hühnerbein, Troost"





**[p. 448]**

During his whole stay in Elberfeld, Engels enjoyed the absolute confidence of the armed workers of the Berg Country and the Mark, as also of the volunteer corps.

On his very first day in Elberfeld, Engels was asked by Herr Riotte, a member of the Committee of Public Safety, about his intentions. Engels stated that he had come, firstly, because he had been sent there from Cologne; secondly, because he believed that he could perhaps be usefully employed in a military respect; and, thirdly, because, having been born in the Berg Country, he considered it a matter of honour to be there when the first armed uprising of the people of the Berg Country took place. He said that he desired to concern himself exclusively with military matters and to have nothing to do with the political character of the movement, since it was obvious that up to now only a movement under the black-red- and-gold flag3 was possible here, and therefore any action against the imperial Constitution had to be avoided.

Herr Riotte was in full agreement with this statement. On the morning of the 14th, while Engels was accompanying Chief Commandant Mirbach to a general muster on the Engelnberg, Herr Höchster, also a member of the Committee of Public Safety, approached him and stated that although there was absolutely nothing to be said against his behaviour, nevertheless his presence evoked the utmost alarm of the Elberfeld bourgeoisie; they were afraid that at any moment he would proclaim a red republic and that by and large they wished him to leave.

Engels said that he wanted neither to impose his services, nor cravenly to desert his post, and he requested, without otherwise undertaking any kind of obligation, that the above-mentioned request should be presented to him in black and white, over the signatures of all members of the Committee of Public Safety.

[^1]: a The colours symbolise Germany's unity, and in this case they denote the unification of the country in accordance with the imperial Constitution.— Ed.





**[p. 449]**

" While fully appreciating the activity hitherto shown in this town by Citizen Friedrich Engels of Barmen, recendy resident in Cologne, it is requested that he should from today leave the precincts of the local municipality since his presence could give rise to misunderstandings as to the character of the movement"

Already before the decision was adopted Engels stated that he would comply with the request of the Committee of Public Safety only if Mirbach ordered him to do so. Mirbach had arrived in Elberfeld at his suggestion, and therefore he could not leave before Mirbach had released him.

On the morning of the 15th, after considerable pressure from the Committee of Public Safety, Mirbach finally signed the requisite order, which was later also made public in the form of a poster.

The armed workers and volunteer corps were highly indignant at the decision of the Committee of Public Safety. They demanded that Engels should remain and said they would "protect him with their lives". Engels himself went to them and calmed them down, referring them to Mirbach and stating that he did not intend to be the first to refuse obedience to the Commandant who had been invited at his suggestion and in whom, moreover, he had absolute confidence.

Engels then took part in one more reconnaissance of the environs and, after handing over his post to his adjutant, departed from Elberfeld.

Let the workers of the Berg Country and the Mark, who have shown such astonishing affection for and devotion to a member of our editorial board, bear in mind that the present movement is only the prologue to another movement a thousand times more serious, in which the issue will concern their own, the workers', most vital interests. This new revolutionary movement will be the result of the present movement and as soon as it occurs Engels—on this the workers can confidently rely—like all the other editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, will be at his post, and no power on earth will induce him to forsake it.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 16, 1849

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 300 (second edition), May 17, 1849

[^3]: Printed according to the newspaper

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: 16*





**[p. 450]**

[THE WORTHY SCHWANBECK]

One of the editors of the Kölnische Zeitung, worthy Schwanbeck, has issued a statement3 about his misfortunes in Elberfeld, in which he also alleges that an "editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung,b acted as an informer against him. All that the editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung referred to knows about the affair is as follows. Whilst holding an official appointment in Elberfeld,c he was asked by a member of the Committee of Public Safety to identify two gendemen who claimed to have come from Cologne and who were being detained in the cells at the town hall; one of these gendemen was none other than worthy Schwanbeck. He declared in the presence of the latter that he would make it his business to see that that gendeman was to be expelled from the town the next morning, which was indeed done. He also recounted to his friend, the member of the Committee of Public Safety, an episode concerning Herr Schwanbeck's connection with Police Inspector Brendamour, which had already been made public by Herr C. Cramer in the Wächter am Rheine That was the extent of the "informing".

Incidentally whether, as worthy Schwanbeck maintains, "there is nothing to spy on in Elberfeld", no one is in a better position to say than the Prussian officer who is still detained as a spy in Elberfeld and who was promptly arrested whilst roaming around there under a false name.

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 16, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 300 (second edition), time May 17, 1849

[^3]: a Kölnische Zeitung No. 117, March 17, 1849.— Ed.

[^4]: Frederick Engels.— Ed. c See this volume, pp. 447-49.—Ed.

[^5]: Cramer, C , "Polizeispione", Der Wächter am Rhein No. 51, May 6, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 451]**

[THE SUMMARY SUPPRESSION OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG]™5

Cologne, May 18. Some time ago Berlin demanded that the local authorities re-introduce a state of siege in Cologne. It was intended to use martial law to suppress the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, but this met with unexpected resistance. The municipal authorities of Cologne then turned to the Public Prosecutor's office here in order to achieve the same purpose by arbitrary arrests. But this failed on account of the legal scruples of the judiciary, just as it had failed twice before on account of the common sense of the Rhenish juries.366 There was nothing for it but to resort to a police ruse, and this, for the time being, has achieved its purpose. The "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" ceases publication for the present On May 16, its editor-in-chief Karl Marx received the following government note:

Why these absurd phrases, these official lies? The trend and tone of the latest pieces of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung do not differ a whit from its first "sample piece". In that "first piece" we wrote among other things:

[^1]: "The tendency of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung to provoke in its readers contempt for the present government, and incite them to violent revolutions and the setting up of a social republic has become stronger in its latest pieces" (!). "The right of hospitality" (!) "which he so disgracefully abused is therefore to be withdrawn from its editor-in-chief, Dr. Karl Marx, and since he has not obtained permission to prolong his stay in these states, he is ordered to leave them within 24 hours. If he should not comply voluntarily with this demand, he is to be forcibly conveyed across the frontier.

[^2]: "Cologne, May 11, 1849

[^3]: Royal Government

[^4]: Moeller

[^5]: To Herr Geiger, Royal Police Superintendent, here."



Eh bien, Messieurs, qu'en dites-vous maintenant?*1

As to our tendency, did not the Government know it? Have we not declared before the jury that it was now "the duty of the press to undermine the whole basis of the existing order"c? Regarding the Hohenzollern subordinate knyaz one can read the following in the issue of October 19, 1848:

"The King is consistent. He would always have been consistent had it not been for the unfortunate fact that the March days interposed that fateful scrap of paper between His Majesty and the people. At this moment His Majesty, just as he did before the March days, seems again to believe in Slavdom's 'legs of iron'; and perhaps the people in Vienna will turn out to be the magician who will transform the iron into clay."d

Est-ce clair, Messieurs?e

And the "social republic"? Have we proclaimed it only in the "latest pieces" of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung?

Did we not speak plainly and clearly enough for those dullards who failed to see the "red" thread running through all our comments and reports on the European movement?

The November 7 issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung says, "Assuming that arms will enable the counter-revolution to establish itself in the whole of Europe, money would then kill it in the whole of Europe. European bankruptcy, national bankruptcy would be the fate nullifying the victory. Bayonets crumble like tinder when they come into contact with the salient 'economic' facts. But developments will not wait for the expiry of the bills of exchange drawn by the European states on the new European society.

"The crushing counter-blow of the June revolution will be struck in Paris. With the victory of the 'red' republic in Paris, armies will be rushed from the interior of their countries to the frontiers and across them, and the real strength of the fighting parties will become evident. We shall then remember this June and this October and we too shall exclaim:

[^1]: See the article "Hüser" (present edition, Vol. 7, p. 20).— Ed. Well, gentlemen, what do you say now? — Ed. c "The First Trial of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung"; Speech by Karl Marx (present edition, Vol. 8, p. 317).— Ed.

[^2]: Marx, "Reply of the King of Prussia to the Delegation of the National Assembly" (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 474-75).— Ed.

[^3]: e Is that clear, gentlemen?—Ed.



"The purposeless massacres perpetrated since the June and October events, the tedious offering of sacrifices since February and March, the very cannibalism of the counter-revolution will convince the nations that there is only one means by which the murderous death agonies of the old society and the bloody birth throes of the new society can be shortened, simplified and concentrated, and that is by revolutionary terror."h

Est-ce clair, Messieurs? From the very beginning we did not consider it necessary to conceal our views. During a polemic with the judiciary here, we told you:

" The actual opposition of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' only begins with the tricolour republic."c

And at that time we were speaking with the prosecution. We summed up the old year, 1848, in the following words (cf. the issue of December 31, 1848):

"The history of the Prussian bourgeoisie, like that of the German bourgeoisie in general between March and December, shows that a purely bourgeois revolution and the establishment of bourgeois rule in the form of a constitutional monarchy is impossible in Germany, and that only a feudal absolutist counter-revolution or a social republi- can revolution is possible."d

Did we therefore have to advance our social republican tendency only in the "last pieces" of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung? Did you not read our articles about the June revolution* and was not the essence of the June revolution the essence of our paper?

Why then your hypocritical phrases, your attempt to find an impossible pretext?

We have no compassion and we ask no compassion from you. When our turn comes, we shall not make excuses for the terror. But the royal terrorists, the terrorists by the grace of God and the law, are in practice brutal, disdainful and mean, in theory cowardly, secretive and deceitful, and in both respects disreputable.

[^1]: a Woe to the conquered! — Ed. b Marx, "The Victory of the Counter-Revolution in Vienna" (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 505-06).— Ed.

[^2]: c Marx, "Public Prosecutor 'Hecker' and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (present edition, Vol. 7, p. 488).— Ed.

[^3]: Marx, "The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-Revolution" (present edition, Vol. 8, p. 178).— Ed.

[^4]: e See present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 124-27, 130-49.— Ed.





**[p. 454]**

The right of hospitality which the insolent intruders, the anterior Russians (Borussians), forced upon us, inhabitants of the Rhineland, on our own land—this hospitality was indeed "disgracefully" abused by the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. We believe that we have thereby rendered a service to the Rhine Province. We have saved the revolutionary honour of our country. From now on the Neue

Preussische Zeitung alone will enjoy the full right of citizenship in the Rhine Province.

In parting we should like to remind our readers of the words printed in the first issue we published in January:

"The table of contents for 1849 reads: Revolutionary rising of the French working class, world war."3

And in the East, a revolutionary army made up of fighters of all nationalities already confronts the alliance of the old Europe represented by the Russian army, while from Paris comes the threat of a "red republic".

Written by Marx on May 18, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 301, May 19, 1849

[^2]: a Marx, "The Revolutionary Movement" (present edition, Vol. 8, p. 215).— Ed.





**[p. 455]**

[HUNGARY]367

Cologne, May 18. At a moment when the actual entry of Russian troops turns the Magyar war into a European war, we are compelled to discontinue our reports on its further course. The only thing we can still do is once more to provide a brief survey of the development of this grand East-European revolutionary war for our readers.

It will be remembered that in the autumn of 1847, even before the February revolution, the Diet at Pressburg,368 under the leadership of Kossuth, adopted a number of revolutionary decisions, such as those providing for the right to sell landed property, the peasant's right to live where he likes, the commutation of feudal obligations, the emancipation of the Jews and equal taxation of all classes. On the very day the February revolution began in Paris (February 22) the Diet permitted Croats and Slavonians when dealing with their internal affairs to use their own language for official purposes and finally, by demanding a separate responsible ministry for Hungary, it made the first step towards a separate Hungary.

The February revolution broke out, and with it came the collapse of the resistance of the Viennese Government to the demands of the Hungarians. On March 16, the day after the Viennese revolution, consent was given for the formation of an independent Hungarian Government thereby reducing the association between Hungary and Austria to a mere personal union.

The now independent Magyar revolution made rapid progress. It abolished all political privileges, introduced universal suffrage, did away with all feudal obligations, labour services and tithes without payment—compensations being payable by the state—brought



**[p. 456]**

Meanwhile the Austrian Government recovered from the blow. While the supposedly responsible ministry at Vienna remained powerless, the camarilla at the Innsbruck Court grew steadily more powerful. It relied on the imperial army in Italy, on the national desires of the Czechs, Croats and Serbs and on the stubborn narrow-mindedness of the Ruthenian369 peasants.

The Serbian insurrection, instigated with the help of money and emissaries from the Court, broke out in the Banat and Bacska on June 17. On the 20th Jellachich had an audience with the Emperor at Innsbruck and was reappointed Ban. Jellachich returned to Croatia, renounced allegiance to the Hungarian Government and on August 25 declared war against it.

The treachery of the Habsburg camarilla was plainly evident. The Hungarians tried once more to persuade the Emperor to return to constitutional methods. They sent a deputation of 200 members of the Diet to Vienna; the Emperor replied evasively. Feeling ran high. The people demanded guarantees and forced a change in the Government. Traitors, who sat in the Pest Government too, were removed, and on September 20 Kossuth was appointed Prime Minister.370 But only four days later the Palatine Archduke Stephan, the representative of the Emperor, escaped to Vienna and on the 26th the Emperor issued the well-known manifesto to the Hun- garians371 in which he declared that the Government was rebellious and dismissed it, appointing the Magyarophobe Jellachich governor of Hungary and encroaching on the most important revolutionary gains of Hungary.

The manifesto, not having been countersigned by an Hungarian Minister, was declared null and void by Kossuth.

Meanwhile Jellachich, taking advantage of the disorganisation and treachery prevailing among the nominally Hungarian, but in reality old imperial, officers and general staff, advanced as far as Stuhlweissenburg. There he was defeated by the Hungarian army, despite its treacherous leaders, and driven back into Austrian territory to the very walls of Vienna. The Emperor and the old traitor Latour then decided to send reinforcements to Jellachich and to reconquer Hungary with the aid of German and Slav troops. But the revolution broke out in Vienna on October 6, and for the time being put an end to the royal imperial schemes.

Kossuth immediately marched with a Magyar corps to the assistance of the Viennese people. At the Leitha he was prevented



**[p. 457]**

Landsturm. He was finally obliged to arrest more than a hundred officers, send them to Pest and have some of them shot. Only after this did he dare to attack. But it was too late—Vienna had already fallen, and his undisciplined Landsturm men were thrown back at Schwechat by the regular Austrian troops.372

The truce be'tween the imperial troops and the Magyars lasted six weeks. While both armies did their utmost to strengthen their forces, the Olmütz camarilla carried out a coup which it had been preparing for a long time. It forced the idiot Ferdinand—who had comprom- ised himself by concessions to the revolution and was now useless—to abdicate and placed on the throne Sophia's son, the boy Francis Joseph, whom it intended to use as its tool. On the basis of the Hungarian Constitution the Pest Diet rejected this change of sovereigns.

Finally in the middle of December the war started. Hungary by then was practically surrounded by the imperial army. The offensive was launched from all sides.

From Austria three army corps, no less than 90,000 strong, under the supreme command of Field Marshal Windischgrätz, advanced southward from the Danube. Nugent with about 20,000 men marched from Styria along the left bank of the Drava. Dahlen with 10,000 men marched from Croatia along the right bank of the Drava to the Banat. Several border regiments, the garrison of Temesvar, the Serbian Landsturm and the Serbian auxiliary corps of Knicanin, totalling 30,000 to 40,000 men commanded by Todorovich and Rukavina, fought in the Banat itself. Puchner with 20,000-25,000 men was in Transylvania as was also Malkowsky with 10,000-15,000 men, who had invaded it from the Bukovina. Finally Schlick with a corps of 20,000-25,000 men moved from Galicia towards the Upper Theiss.

The imperial army thus numbered at least 200,000 regular, mostly battle-hardened troops, not counting the Slav, Romance and Saxon

Landsturm men and national guards who took part in the fighting in the south and in Transylvania.

Against this colossal fighting force Hungary could pit an army of perhaps 80,000-90,000 trained soldiers, including 24,000 men who had formerly served in the imperial army, and in addition 50,000 to 60,000 poorly organised Honveds373 and Landsturm men. This army was commanded for the most part by traitors similar to the officers whom Kossuth had had arrested at the Leitha.



**[p. 458]**

Hence the plan of the Hungarians to withdraw slowly into the interior, to train the recruits in continuous skirmishes and as a last resort to place between themselves and their enemies the Theiss line with its impassable swamps, which form a natural moat around the heart of the Magyar lands.

According to all calculations, the Hungarians should have been able to hold the area between Pressburg and Pest for two to three months even against the superior strength of the Austrians. But severe frosts suddenly set in, and for several months all rivers and swamps were covered with a thick layer of ice capable of bearing the weight even of heavy guns. This deprived the terrain of all features favouring defence, and made all fortifications built by the Magyars useless and liable to be outflanked. And so it happened that before twenty days had passed the Hungarian army was thrown back from Oedenburg and Pressburg to Raab, from Raab to Mor, from Mor to Pest, and even had to leave Pest and withdraw beyond the Theiss at the very beginning of the campaign.

The other corps fared no better than the main army. In the south Nugent and Dahlen continued their advance towards Esseg, which was occupied by the Magyars, and the Serbs gradually approached the Maros line; in Transylvania Puchner joined Malkowsky at Maros-Vâsârhely; in the north Schlick descended from the Car- pathians to the Theiss and made junction with Windischgrätz at Miskolcz.

The Austrians seemed to have practically put an end to the Magyar revolution. They had two-thirds of Hungary and three- fourths of Transylvania in their rear, the Hungarians were attacked



**[p. 459]**

It was essential now—while on the front the Theiss still formed an insuperable barrier to the enemy—to gain some breathing space on one flank or another.

This was done at two points: in Transylvania by Bern, and in Slovakia by Görgey. Both carried out operations which show that they are the most gifted commanders of our time.

On December 29, Bern arrived at Klausenburg, the only town in Transylvania still held by the Magyars. Here he quickly concentrated the reinforcements he had brought and the remnants of the defeated Magyar and Szekler374 troops, and marched to Maros- Vâsârhely, defeated the Austrians and drove Malkowsky first across the Carpathians into the Bukovina and from there into Galicia, where he pushed on towards Stanislav. Then, swiftly turning back into Transylvania he pursued Puchner to within a few miles of Hermannstadt. After several skirmishes and a few swift drives in various directions, the whole of Transylvania was in his hands apart from two towns, Hermannstadt and Kronstadt, and these too would have been taken if the Russians had not been called in. The 10,000-strong Russian auxiliary troops tipped the scales and forced Bern to fall back on Szeklerland. There he organised an uprising of the Szeklers, and having succeeded in this, he had the Szekler

Landsturm engage Puchner, who had reached Schässburg, while he bypassed Puchner's positions, moved straight on Hermannstadt and drove the Russians out, then defeated Puchner who had followed him, marched on Kronstadt and entered it without firing a shot.

Transylvania was thus won and the rear of the Magyar army cleared. The natural defence line formed by the Theiss now found its continuation and complement in the Carpathian mountain range and the Transylvanian Alps, from the Zips down to the borders of the Banat.

Görgey at the same time made a similar triumphal march in North-Western Hungary. He set out with a corps from Pest to Slovakia, for two months kept in check the corps of generals Götz, Csorich and Simunich operating against him from three directions, and finally, when his position became untenable against their superior forces, fought his way through the Carpathians to Eperies and Kaschau. There he appeared in the rear of Schlick and forced

[^1]: a See footnote on p. 20.— Ed.





**[p. 460]**

This main army, which was now commanded by Dembinski, had likewise crossed the Theiss and had repulsed the enemy all along the line. It had reached Hatvan, six miles from Pest, when a stronger concentration of enemy forces compelled it to retreat again. After offering vigorous resistance at Kapolna, Maklar and Poroszlo it recrossed the Theiss just at the moment when Görgey reached the Theiss at Tokaj. The union of the two corps was the signal for a new magnificent advance of the Hungarians. Newly trained recruits arriving from the interior strengthened the Hungarian army in the field. Polish and German legions were formed, capable leaders had been trained or enlisted, and in place of the leaderless, unorganised mass of December, the imperial troops were suddenly faced by a concentrated, brave, and numerous army which was well organised and excellently led.

The Magyars crossed the Theiss in three columns. The right wing (Görgey) moved northwards, outflanked the Ramberg division, which had been following it, at Eperies and quickly drove this division back through Rimaszombat towards the main imperial army. The latter was defeated by Dembinski at Erlau, Gyöngyös, Gödöllö and Hatvan, and hastily retreated to Pest. Finally the left wing (Vetter) dislodged Jellachich from Kecskemet, Szolnok and Szegléd, defeated him at Jâsz-Berény and compelled him, too, to retreat to the walls of Pest. There the imperial forces stood along the Danube from Pest to Waitzen, surrounded in a wide semi-circle by the Magyars.

To avoid exposing Pest to bombardment from Ofen, the Hungarians had recourse to their well-tried tactics of dislodging the Austrians from their positions by manoeuvres rather than by open frontal attacks. Görgey captured Waitzen and forced the Austrians to fall back beyond the Gran and Danube; he defeated Wohlgemuth between the Gran and Neutra, thereby relieving Komorn, which was besieged by imperial troops. Since its line of retreat was threatened, the imperial army had to decide on a hurried withdrawal. Weiden, the new Commander-in-Chief, retreated in the direction of Raab and Pressburg, and Jellachich was obliged, in order to pacify his extremely refractory Croats, to hastily retreat with them down the Danube into Slavonia.

During their retreat, which rather resembled a stampede, Weiden (and especially his rearguard commanded by Schlick) and Jellachich



**[p. 461]**

Simultaneously with these astonishing victories of the Magyars over the main Austrian army, Moritz Perczel pressed forward from Szegedin and Tolna towards Peterwardein, relieved it, occupied Bacska and moved into the Banat, in order to link up there with Bern who was advancing from Transylvania. Bern had already taken Arad and besieged Temesvar; Perczel stood at Werschetz close to the Turkish frontier; the Banat was thus conquered in a few days. The fortified Transylvanian mountain passes were at the same time held by the Szeklers, the passes in Upper Hungary by the Landsturm, and Görgey with a considerable army stood at the Jablunka Pass on the Moravian-Galician frontier.

In short, in a few more days the victorious Magyar army, driving the remnants of the mighty Austrian legions before it, would have entered Vienna in triumph and put an end to the Austrian monarchy for all time.

Hungary's separation from Austria had been decided in Debreczin on April 14375; the alliance with Poland, openly proclaimed since the middle of January, was turned into reality by the 20,000-30,000 Poles who joined the Hungarian army. The alliance with the German Austrians, which had existed since the Viennese revolution of October 6 and the battle at Schwechat, was similarly preserved and sustained by the German legions within the Hungarian army, as well as by the fact that the Magyars were faced with the strategic and political necessity of occupying Vienna and revolutionising Austria so as to secure recognition of their declaration of indepen- dence.

Thus, the Magyar war very soon lost the national character it had had in the beginning, and assumed a clearly European character, precisely as a result of what would seem to be a purely national act, as a result of the declaration of independence. Only when Hungary proclaimed her separation from Austria, and thereby the dissolution of the Austrian monarchy, did the alliance with the Poles for the liberation of both countries, and the alliance with the Germans for the revolutionisation of Eastern Germany acquire a definite character and a solid basis. If Hungary were independent, Poland restored, German Austria turned into the revolutionary focus of Germany, with Lombardy and Italy winning independence—these plans, if carried out, would destroy the entire East-European system



**[p. 462]**

The Holy Alliance,376 therefore, had to make every effort to stem the impending revolution in Eastern Europe—the Russian armies rolled towards the Transylvanian and Galician frontiers; Prussia occupied the Bohemian-Silesian frontier and allowed the Russians to pass through her territory towards Prerau, and within a few days the first Russian army corps stood on Moravian soil.

The Magyars, who clearly understood that in a few weeks they would have to deal with numerous fresh troops, did not advance on Vienna as quickly as was expected at the beginning. They could not take Vienna, just as they could not take Pest, by a frontal attack without shelling the city, and this they were not prepared to do. Again, as at Pest, they were compelled to resort to outflanking manoeuvres, and this required time and the assurance that their own flanks and rear were secure. But it was here that the Russians menaced their rear, while if Vienna were in direct danger strong detachments of Radetzky's army could be immediately expected from the other direction.

The Hungarians therefore acted very wisely when, instead of advancing swiftly on Vienna, they confined themselves to steadily forcing the imperial armies out of Hungary, enveloping them in a wide arc from the Little Carpathians to the foot-hills of the Styrian Alps, dispatching a strong corps towards the Jablunka, fortifying and covering the Galician mountain passes, attacking Ofen and rapidly proceeding with the recruitment of 250,000 men, especially from the reconquered western comitats. In this way they secured their flanks and rear and assembled an army which had no more need to fear the Russian contingents than the once colossal imperial army. 200,000 soldiers of this redoubtable black-and-yellowa army had invaded Hungary and barely 50,000 of them had returned; the rest were either killed, wounded, sick, taken prisoner or had changed sides.

True, the Russians threaten to send even more gigantic armies. Some speak of 120,000 soldiers, others of 170,000. According to the Triester Freihafen, the mobile army in the field is expected considerably to surpass 500,000 men. But Russian exaggerations are well known: of the figures they give only half are on the nominal rolls, and of the numbers on the nominal roll again less than half are really there. If, after deducting the number of troops required for the occupation of Poland, the effective Russian aid amounts to from

[^1]: a The Austrian imperial colours.— Ed.





**[p. 463]**

The Magyar war of 1849 has strong points of resemblance with the Polish war of 1830-31.377 But the great difference is that the factors which were against the Poles at that time now act in favour of the Magyars. Lelewel, as we know, unsuccessfully urged, first, that the mass of the population be bound to the revolution by emancipating the peasants and the Jews, and secondly, that all three partitioning powers be involved in the war and this war turned into a European war, by raising an insurrection throughout the old Polish territories. The Magyars started at the point which the Poles only achieved when it was too late. The Hungarians' first measure was to carry out a social revolution in their country, to abolish feudalism; their second measure was to involve Poland and Germany in the war, thus turning it into a European war. It started with the entry of the first Russian corps into German territory, and will take a decisive turn when the first French battalion enters German territory.

By becoming a European war, the Hungarian war is brought into reciprocal interaction with all other factors of the European movement. Its course affects not only Germany, but also France and England. The English bourgeoisie cannot be expected to let Austria become a Russian province and it is certain that the French people will not calmly look on while the counter-revolution comes closer and closer to attacking them. Whatever the outcome of the French elections,378 the army at any rate has declared for the revolution. And the army today is the decisive force. If the army wants war—and it does want it—then war it will be.

War will come. Paris is on the threshold of revolution, whether as a result of the elections or of the army's fraternisation with the revolutionary party at the ballot-box. While in Southern Germany the core of a German revolutionary army is being formed, which prevents Prussia from taking an active part in the Hungarian campaign, France is on the point of playing an active role in the struggle. A few weeks, perhaps even a few days, will decide everything, and soon the French, the Magyar-Polish, and the German revolutionary armies will celebrate their fraternisation on the battlefield before the walls of Berlin.379

[^1]: Written by Engels on May 18, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 301, May 19, 1849





**[p. 464]**

["TO MY PEOPLE"]

Cologne, May 18. "To my people!"3 Not—"To my glorious army!"380 Have the Russians perhaps been defeated? Has the wind shifted and once again, as in March of last year, knocked the military cap from the head of the "unweakened" servant of Russia? Are the "loyal subjects", living under a state of siege, once more in full rebellion?

When in 1813 the old "monarch of blessed memory"0 likewise derived from the advance of the Cossacks the necessary courage to shake off his abject cowardly role and the bloody punishments of the revolutionary empire, then—in spite of the Cossacks, Bashkirs and the "glorious army" made famous by battles at Jena and Magdeburg and by the surrender of Küstrin to 150 Frenchmen—it was only the lying promises of an "Appeal to My People"381 which made possible the crusade of the Holy Alliance against the successors to the French revolution. And now! Has not the reinvigorated Hohenzollern, as a result of the incursion of the Cossacks into German territory, obtained sufficient courage to renounce his cowardly role of the post-March period and to cancel the "scrap of paper interposed between him and his people" owing to the revolution?382 Has not "My glorious army" in Dresden, Breslau, Posen, Berlin, and on the Rhine, worthily wreaked vengeance on the revolution by the valiant slaughter of unarmed men, women and children with shrapnel and caustic?383

Have not the last cowardly concessions made in March—abolition of censorship, freedom of association, arming of the people—once

[^1]: a Appeal issued by Frederick William IV on May 15, 1849.— Ed. b Frederick William III.—Ed.





**[p. 465]**

No, the son of the hero of Jena and Magdeburg still does not feel safe enough in spite of the alliance with the Cossacks, in spite of the privileges in regard to murder and courts martial afforded to the uncurbed "glorious" military horde. The unweakened Crown is afraid, it appeals "To my people", it "feels compelled" to address an appeal for help and support against "internal and external enemies" to the downtrodden besieged "people" which has been battered by grapes- hot.

"In these difficult times, Prussia is called upon to protect Germany against internal and external enemies. Therefore, I call My people to arms already now. It is a matter of establishing law and order in our state and in the other German states where our help is required; it is a matter of creating Germany's unity, of protecting her freedom from the rule of terror of a party that is ready to sacrifice morality, honour and loyalty to its passions, a party which has succeeded in casting a net of delusion and folly over a section of the people."

"That is the gist of the royal address," exclaims the filthy police agent Dumont,b and the venal police claqueurs of Dumont have indeed discovered the "gist".

"External enemies"! By that is meant the "party of terror", the party which terrifies the valiant Hohenzollern, the party which demands our interference in the "other German states". The people of the Rhine Province, Silesia and Saxony are called upon "in the name of German unity" to put an end to the revolutionary movements in the foreign German states of Baden, Bavaria, and Saxony! And to this end the bait with which the Hohenzollern gladdened the hearts of the people in 1813 is repeated, the well-tried "royal word" is pledged once again, promising the "people" a castrated recognition of the Frankfurt Constitution, promising them the "protection of law and liberty" against "godlessness". "I and My house wish to serve the lord."384 Is the well-tried pledge of a "Hohenzollern's royal word" not worth a crusade against the "party which terrifies the Crown that promises so much"?

The powerful subordinate knyaz of imperial Russia recalled the Prussian deputies from Frankfurt only in order now, in accordance with his March promises, to put himself "at the head of Germany". The Agreement Assembly and the imposed Chamber were dis- missed, the "scrap of paper" was replaced by a martial-law Constitution and murderous military courts solely in order to guarantee the people the "protection of law and liberty!"

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 440-46.— Ed. b "Die Ansprache des Königs", Kölnische Zeitung No. 118, May 18, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 466]**

facto (the Düsseldorf newspapers, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung etc.), and finally only the police cesspool of the Kölnische Zeitung and the rascally newspaper in Berlin3 were imposed on the "free" subjects. All this has been done so that there should not be the slightest doubt about the value of the "royal word".

And the word of the Hohenzollern does indeed merit that the people don military uniforms to strengthen the royal courage so as to procure—under the army reserve law—a royal bounty of one taler monthly for the wives they leave behind as a "safeguard against begging".

Written on May 18, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 301, May 19, 1849 time

[^1]: a Neue Preussische Zeitung (Kreuz-Zeitung).— Ed.





**[p. 467]**

TO THE WORKERS OF COLOGNE385

Finally we warn you against any revolt in Cologne. In the military situation obtaining in Cologne you would be irretrievably lost. You have seen in Elberfeld that the bourgeoisie sends the workers into the fire and betrays them afterwards in the most infamous way. A state of siege in Cologne would demoralise the entire Rhine Province, and a state of siege would be the inevitable consequence of any rising on your part at this moment. The Prussians will be frustrated by your calmness.

In bidding you farewell the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung thank you for the sympathy you have shown them. Their last word everywhere and always will be: emancipation of the working class!

The Editorial Board of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung

[^1]: Written on May 18, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 301, May 19, 1849





£)tgan fret fttmottath.

M 3 0 1 . Ä Ö l l t , »omflag, i><n 19. fltui. 1 8 4 9 .

2lbfd?ieb«mort ber bleuen 9tbeinifici>en 3eitung.

fl VIn offntt S>i<b i" of*"" Bdjintl - 51«fb« Sippe ben Jro« unbbin|u<trnb«n »opn, j t n c j , , r a r m , SRonn , m jrrrijjnm «««.and. ff« fallen t>i< S û i f m unb ïùrf«n 3 " ' " S""«» *'" blifcenbrn Drgt-n. <St roirft auf mtin JJanpt bit 3*ollen ; <R< fallt m i * bit f*L»i»)>Mio« »ifrrlroc IH »ort) im »tetbrii t u f » » : „Bit (Srb.Uion !" - <», „,,,(, f,, ^„„b IM,I brr fltipi9<n *anb. S e t frt>inu(,u,eu IStft Rolmurttn ! S o bin i * mil (Bprrn «t Cca.rn. M i l bvc oartrn, brr frtjini.l.n.ollrn Slii A btm Iiun Frl flog &«' tbblmo e<feofi, 15 gern n>ol)l beftrrntrn mein (Brab mit « a l , Siiun Jfranj o u * bringt ft out Wutn.n unb illu« Km $inl<-rb«!t T"1'" »•« <*H,*t - Ttr 1>rrup. -jafammt 6rm Sjar« - SBIain Unb ft> M««' i U) •"•« ba in mtintt Toft, P u * rè faiifrn bif Ungarn, »« frt>lrft bir <Pfalj ^u rub'n auf mrinrn ÏBunben; (Sine floljt i Hfb.uenlcidjt1 Trti S o l u m mit ilbrr bit »abrtl C«n kobrn fein UBfib unb ftin Xodbltrlrin 9tad>>brr 31rbcit fur tnicb gcrounotn

>Smi 'US.,i«n Ube, bu fampfrnbr SSSrlt. 3Brnn bir It«» firent mi; <Sla* |rrbrtrf)t. ?«un >U6e.ljr rmg.nbrn $trrr! 3 n b.« ftampfr« JBtiitrn unb Älnmmtn S u n *ilb*. u puloirgrfctitoaratr« grlb. SBenn ba« ö o l f frtn icttr« „ 2 * u l b i g ! fprt At, 33un VJbt,or e*n>erttr unb Sperrt! l>ann ftrbn.wir rulrbrr lufatninrn! « u n ?ubr b o * merit fut immrt "Ubc! fl Sit brm « o r t mil Dem 3 * r o m , an bcr Co- i Tnn fit lorn or» CSrift nirtit ihr »ruber! noil, am SNrifin - 58«lb r.tttl 0 mid) rafltlnb m bit »Ob'. <Sinr allltit trtu» ffitfcllin » a l b ftbr b rri|ii,cr tl Mtbrr ' «Wirb btm iptont jtrf»m«ttrtnbtn Oolft ftin H i ' ®rid>i«t, txr Jtrbril U!

F. PRHUGRATH.

0ln bie Arbeiter Aölrrö.

3BII roarnrn (Su* fdili«r>lid! oor |fm 5>ulfd) in Si JIn. flarti 0»r imlilànfdjfn Ca9« Jlilnê »àrtt *r rttiunä«lo« D«rior»n ghr i)»i)t m Gifeisu*. geu Mn, roic Dir Bburjeoiricif Jlrotiitr in« Jeu« frtjicfe uno i'i«r hmcrrhtr auf* Kif Drrlrortjii^il« otrrali), Oer 8ela9<runi}6ji4lanb m Rpib n'iir Of Die ^anjr f Rofmproma unmoralifirrn unb b(r !8<lo9frun9«juftanf u?ar! DK nottirofncigt Jolgt |f Otr lirbfbung otrn limn ©tiif in 0i(!«m 'ui9<nb!iclf. ©it 1>rtuê'n Mr6«n an iîurer Mutw crrjrp«ifcln. Dit "Rreoticuie ötr i Jîfuin SRljfinicn 3fi!unj Pan Frn Sud) bfim Ülbfct KPt fur Pie n Virn bttriflinr Ibeilnohmf. Jihr Itgleô ffiort tfir D ubfral! uni- imincr («in : lî man pipauo n ücartcilcncen Klafft! F i ( SRt Oofucn 6(r 3ieu(n 3îl)tin. j e i t u n g .

[^1]: rr ^ 3ufl 4 Ul ftmt« m n b f u 4 i H n*S M " «r-l K ttt f It, « j o- ( i t * » « 111 * | r i . ^ J b m b 9 t i t

[^2]: * « T »" * a- W "* . * «." 3 *TO " » * • * K» « "> "• "t « n * n 1 * * » a a it« ir

[^3]: >t îîa *l * < * t i n m H um a

[^4]: jit, 8 » « » , c ™' , " , ,*"• » » * « 1 « H a , t t ( » ™ t i r i , 4 i l . S u n i « « K « » t « « • g i ( * > ytf •*

[^5]: _ i 1 t n f t , t f~«—4 m » u » » Ö pllomation on M« ftaue t,*m " s r , e « "° t U t « ™t r t i « « 1 1 " , < ; * s « t * I *

[^6]: ' * fl5,\T*m "T ' « Si V t

[^7]: i» « « » » J C » $ i 1 . „„ . . y. * J S I C H I «

[^8]: The last issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (No. 301, May 19, 1849) which was

[^9]: printed in red ink





KARL MARX

and F R E D E R I C K ENGELS

ARTICLES AND STATEMENTS

May-July 1849



