---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "106. From the Theatre of War "
Page_Range: "412-414"
---

# 106. From the Theatre of War 



**[p. 381]**

[FROM THE THEATRE OF WAR]

Cologne, evening of May 1. Reports just received from Berlin and Vienna confirm the continued withdrawal of the imperial troops. In Pressburg, where on the 27th nothing was known about attacks by the Hungarians, there are continuous commotion, confusion and retreat.

An encounter took place near Komorn. A force consisting of two divisions of imperial troops under Schlick drove the Hungarians from the Sandberg near Acs and this is now presented as a victory. But, on looking at the map and discovering that Acs is situated on the right bank of the Danube, a mile* from Komorn, the fact emerges that, even according to this official account, the Hungarians have crossed the Danube near Komorn and are in command of the road from Gran to Pressburg. And Schlick still talks about the royal imperial troops surrounding (!) Komorn!!

Welden's headquarters, transferred from Pest to Kapolna, from Kapolna to Raab, is now moving even further back, to Oedenburg, hard by the Styrian border and to the south of Vienna.

Jellachich has actually received orders to cut his way through to Croatia and to drum up as many men to escort him as possible.

North of the Danube, Wohlgemuth has temporarily disappeared from the scene. He was driven off Schutt (the big island in the Danube); and the Csikos (mounted Landsturm) patrolled with impunity from Komorn to Szerdahely, halfway to Pressburg. Wohlgemuth must have withdrawn towards Pressburg and the March.

[^1]: a See footnote on p. 20.— Ed.





**[p. 382]**

It is reported that intervention by the Russians is imminent. One paper even maintains they have taken up positions near Lunden- burg, on the border between Austria, Moravia and Hungary, but this is obviously a complete fabrication. It is expected that, as in Transylvania, they will be used as reserve and garrison troops in the towns, thus leaving all the Austrian troops free to concentrate on the Hungarians. It is said that 15,000 Russians are to come to Vienna as a garrison.

A Prussian staff officer has also arrived in Olmütz "for the purpose of reaching an understanding with the Austrian Govern- ment". When "My glorious army"301 marches in, the Bohemians will soon discover the meaning of this "understanding"!

Tomorrow evening we shall probably have news of further decisive Magyar successes.

Written by Engels on May 1, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the special supplement Published in English for the first to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 287, time May 2, 1849

[^1]: a The Austrian imperial colours.— Ed.



