---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "122. The Tsar and His Subordinate Knyazes "
Page_Range: "445-447"
---

# 122. The Tsar and His Subordinate Knyazes 



**[p. 414]**

THE TSAR AND HIS SUBORDINATE KNYAZES3

Cologne, May 8. It is said that the French ambassadorb in Berlin has protested against the entry of the Prussians into Saxony.

At last, therefore, the French Government has noticed that the East-European counter-revolution menaces it as well, and that the new Holy Alliance 321 has as its ultimate, supreme aim nothing other than the conquest, and this time, perhaps, the partition of France.

We know positively that in the treaty which has been concluded between the orthodox Tsar and his two subordinate knyazes from Olmütz and Potsdamc the ultimate aim of the alliance is declared to be the conquest of France, the abolition of the Republic and the elevation of the "legitimate King", the "son of holy Louis", the idiot Henry of Bordeaux to the throne of France and Navarre.

That Odilon Barröt is involved in this plot is hardly doubtful. This is what they expect you to do, Prussian soldiers of the army reserve! You are being called away from your hearths and homes, from your wives and children, in order first of all to fight against your brothers in Germany and Prussia, to help in suppressing the small remnant of the freedom which you won last year—and then to fight against the Hungarians who are coming to the aid of your threatened freedom—and when you have completed this work to the satisfaction of your knyazes and your supreme lord and master, Tsar Nicholas, then you will be led across the Rhine against the nation whose heroic uprisings in 1789-94, 1830, and 1848 procured you all the freedoms you enjoy.

[^1]: a "Knyaz" is the Russian word for "prince".—Ed. b F. V. E. Arago.— Ed. c The Austrian Emperor Francis Joseph and the Prussian King Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 415]**

Written by Engels on May 8, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 293, May 9, 1849 time

