---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "129. The New Prussian Constitution "
Page_Range: "461-463"
---

# 129. The New Prussian Constitution 



**[p. 430]**

THE NEW PRUSSIAN CONSTITUTION

Cologne, May 12. In November of last year, after the dispersal of the people's representatives, the Potsdam member of the Trinity,349

blessed by divine grace and the state of siege,3 imposed a Constitu- tion which was to be revised by the Chambers soon to be convened. As we know, the new representatives of the people suffered a fate similar to that of the old ones; the latter were dispersed by Wrangel's bayonets, the former received from Manteuffel a simple little notice of dissolution,350 ordering them to go home. That put an end, too, to the revision of the Constitution.

Thus the Christian-Germanic sovereign and his accomplices, the whole host of lay-abouts, parasites and vampires sucking the blood of the people, whether of high-born lineage or without ancestry, whether decorated with orders or undecorated, have acquired free scope for planting whatever kind of fruit they like.

In November of last year, the royalty, bureaucracy and junkers were still compelled to use various hypocritical statements and to accept articles of the Constitution which seemed very liberal. The November Constitution had to be framed in a way that would make it possible to ensnare the numerically large, stupid part of the so-called "Prussian people".

Now all such subtle diplomatic considerations have become superfluous. Is not brother-in-law Nicholas already on German soil with 20,000 men? Has not Dresden been demolished by artillery shelling? Does there not exist the closest alliance of Prussia with the cowardly fugitive in Königstein, with imperial Max in Munich,351

[^1]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 431]**

with the bulldog Ernest Augustus of Hanover, with the whole counter-revolutionary gang inside and outside Germany?

Certainly, this moment has been used by the Hohenzollern to the best advantage. He had a new Constitution drawn up for his "beloved" subjects, and he sanctioned and imposed it in Charlotten- burg on May 10.

The latest royal-Prussian Constitution, the only one sincerely intended, which also has the advantage over the November Constitution of consisting of only seventeen paragraphs, reads as follows:3

Written by Marx on May 12, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 297, May 13, 1849 time

[^1]: a There followed the "Verordnung über den Belagerungszustand" ("Decree on the State of Siege") of May 10, 1849, which the Neue Rheinische Zeitung published under the heading "The Latest Prussian Constitution".— Ed.



