---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "130. The Sanguinary Law in Düsseldorf "
Page_Range: "463-465"
---

# 130. The Sanguinary Law in Düsseldorf 



**[p. 432]**

THE SANGUINARY LAW IN DÜSSELDORF

Cologne, May 12. The "new Constitution", the abolition of ordinary laws and law-courts, together with the announcement of murderous privileges conferred by the sovereign3 on "My glorious army", already came into force in Düsseldorf yesterday.

After the defeat and massacre of the people, the commander immediately asked Berlin for instructions. From Herr von Hohen- zollern's accomplices, Brandenburg-Manteuffel, an order was re- ceived by telegraph to proclaim the sanguinary law and to set up murderous military courts.

By Articles 1 and 6 of the army orders the right of association is abolished, and Articles 5, 6, 7, 24, 25, 26, 27, and 28, of the imposed

when a state of siege was proclaimed the Düsseldorf press was put under censorship, a measure which gave rise to loud protests and great indignation even among the majority of the feeble Agreers' company. Today, after the new Hohenzollern achievements, when at the side of the subordinate knyaz in Potsdam there are no Chambers, but instead snub-nosed Cossack kinsmen, today the powers that be are not content with censorship, but proceed simply to suppression of the press.

According to Article 7, Düsseldorf newspapers, and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung as well, are prohibited in the Düsseldorf area. According to Article 8, nothing but official "information" may be published.

[^1]: "Schnaps" Charter352 are made invalid.

[^2]: Last year, under the rule of "citizen and communist" Drigalski,353

[^3]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 433]**

Article 9. Anyone who by word of mouth, in writing, in the press, or in representational form, incites resistance to the legal (!) orders of the authorities will come before a court martial.

Article 10. Anyone who is caught in open or armed resistance to the measures of the legal authorities, or who by traitorous action exposes the troops to danger or harm, will be summarily shot in accordance with martial law.

The laurels of the murderer Windischgrätz allow no rest to the reinvigorated Hohenzollern!

Written by Marx on May 12, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 297, May 13, 1849 time

