---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "133. The Kreuz- Zeitung "
Page_Range: "468-469"
---

# 133. The Kreuz- Zeitung 



**[p. 437]**

THE KREUZ-ZEITUNG

Cologne, May 15. The rascally Prussian newspaper does us the special favour of compiling an anthology of unpatriotic expressions published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung about the "imperial-Rus- sian subordinate knyaz in Olmütz" and the "Prussian bug-ridden knights".3 The selection is limited to the dispatches from Breslau and is accompanied at the end by the following outburst of indignation of the covertly frivolous "crusader":

"Compared to this Chimborazo insolence, how flat is the announcement of the wedding of the Prussian King published in the French Moniteurin 1793: ' Le jeune tyran de Prusse vient d'épouser une demoiselle de Mecklenbourg\"b

In order to complete as fully as possible the account of the "Chimborazo insolence" of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, we ask the rascally newspaper to be so good as to reprint the Premier-Cologne from No. 294 of our newspaper "The Deeds of the Hohenzollern Dynasty".0 We hear that Frau von Hohenzollernd is a zealous reader of the rascally sheet and we do not adopt so "exclusive" an attitude that we begrudge the respectable lady some historical studies on the family of her spouse for her amusement.

[^1]: Written by Marx on May 15, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Published in English for the first Zeitung No. 299, May 16, 1849 time

[^3]: a See this volume, pp.359 and 414.— Ed. b "The young tyrant of Prussia recently married a young lady of Mecklenburg." (From a report in the section "Berliner Zuschauer" published in the Neue Preussische Zeitung [Kreuz-Zeitung] No. 107, May 10, 1849.) A reference to Luise von Mecklenburg-Strelitz.— Ed.

[^4]: c See this volume, pp. 418-22. The Premier-Cologne—leading article datelined Cologne.—Ed.

[^5]: à Queen Elizabeth, the wife of Frederick William IV.— Ed.



