---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "138. The Summary Suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "482-486"
---

# 138. The Summary Suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 451]**

[THE SUMMARY SUPPRESSION OF THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG]™5

Cologne, May 18. Some time ago Berlin demanded that the local authorities re-introduce a state of siege in Cologne. It was intended to use martial law to suppress the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, but this met with unexpected resistance. The municipal authorities of Cologne then turned to the Public Prosecutor's office here in order to achieve the same purpose by arbitrary arrests. But this failed on account of the legal scruples of the judiciary, just as it had failed twice before on account of the common sense of the Rhenish juries.366 There was nothing for it but to resort to a police ruse, and this, for the time being, has achieved its purpose. The "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" ceases publication for the present On May 16, its editor-in-chief Karl Marx received the following government note:

Why these absurd phrases, these official lies? The trend and tone of the latest pieces of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung do not differ a whit from its first "sample piece". In that "first piece" we wrote among other things:

[^1]: "The tendency of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung to provoke in its readers contempt for the present government, and incite them to violent revolutions and the setting up of a social republic has become stronger in its latest pieces" (!). "The right of hospitality" (!) "which he so disgracefully abused is therefore to be withdrawn from its editor-in-chief, Dr. Karl Marx, and since he has not obtained permission to prolong his stay in these states, he is ordered to leave them within 24 hours. If he should not comply voluntarily with this demand, he is to be forcibly conveyed across the frontier.

[^2]: "Cologne, May 11, 1849

[^3]: Royal Government

[^4]: Moeller

[^5]: To Herr Geiger, Royal Police Superintendent, here."



Eh bien, Messieurs, qu'en dites-vous maintenant?*1

As to our tendency, did not the Government know it? Have we not declared before the jury that it was now "the duty of the press to undermine the whole basis of the existing order"c? Regarding the Hohenzollern subordinate knyaz one can read the following in the issue of October 19, 1848:

"The King is consistent. He would always have been consistent had it not been for the unfortunate fact that the March days interposed that fateful scrap of paper between His Majesty and the people. At this moment His Majesty, just as he did before the March days, seems again to believe in Slavdom's 'legs of iron'; and perhaps the people in Vienna will turn out to be the magician who will transform the iron into clay."d

Est-ce clair, Messieurs?e

And the "social republic"? Have we proclaimed it only in the "latest pieces" of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung?

Did we not speak plainly and clearly enough for those dullards who failed to see the "red" thread running through all our comments and reports on the European movement?

The November 7 issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung says, "Assuming that arms will enable the counter-revolution to establish itself in the whole of Europe, money would then kill it in the whole of Europe. European bankruptcy, national bankruptcy would be the fate nullifying the victory. Bayonets crumble like tinder when they come into contact with the salient 'economic' facts. But developments will not wait for the expiry of the bills of exchange drawn by the European states on the new European society.

"The crushing counter-blow of the June revolution will be struck in Paris. With the victory of the 'red' republic in Paris, armies will be rushed from the interior of their countries to the frontiers and across them, and the real strength of the fighting parties will become evident. We shall then remember this June and this October and we too shall exclaim:

[^1]: See the article "Hüser" (present edition, Vol. 7, p. 20).— Ed. Well, gentlemen, what do you say now? — Ed. c "The First Trial of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung"; Speech by Karl Marx (present edition, Vol. 8, p. 317).— Ed.

[^2]: Marx, "Reply of the King of Prussia to the Delegation of the National Assembly" (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 474-75).— Ed.

[^3]: e Is that clear, gentlemen?—Ed.



"The purposeless massacres perpetrated since the June and October events, the tedious offering of sacrifices since February and March, the very cannibalism of the counter-revolution will convince the nations that there is only one means by which the murderous death agonies of the old society and the bloody birth throes of the new society can be shortened, simplified and concentrated, and that is by revolutionary terror."h

Est-ce clair, Messieurs? From the very beginning we did not consider it necessary to conceal our views. During a polemic with the judiciary here, we told you:

" The actual opposition of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' only begins with the tricolour republic."c

And at that time we were speaking with the prosecution. We summed up the old year, 1848, in the following words (cf. the issue of December 31, 1848):

"The history of the Prussian bourgeoisie, like that of the German bourgeoisie in general between March and December, shows that a purely bourgeois revolution and the establishment of bourgeois rule in the form of a constitutional monarchy is impossible in Germany, and that only a feudal absolutist counter-revolution or a social republi- can revolution is possible."d

Did we therefore have to advance our social republican tendency only in the "last pieces" of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung? Did you not read our articles about the June revolution* and was not the essence of the June revolution the essence of our paper?

Why then your hypocritical phrases, your attempt to find an impossible pretext?

We have no compassion and we ask no compassion from you. When our turn comes, we shall not make excuses for the terror. But the royal terrorists, the terrorists by the grace of God and the law, are in practice brutal, disdainful and mean, in theory cowardly, secretive and deceitful, and in both respects disreputable.

[^1]: a Woe to the conquered! — Ed. b Marx, "The Victory of the Counter-Revolution in Vienna" (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 505-06).— Ed.

[^2]: c Marx, "Public Prosecutor 'Hecker' and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung" (present edition, Vol. 7, p. 488).— Ed.

[^3]: Marx, "The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-Revolution" (present edition, Vol. 8, p. 178).— Ed.

[^4]: e See present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 124-27, 130-49.— Ed.





**[p. 454]**

The right of hospitality which the insolent intruders, the anterior Russians (Borussians), forced upon us, inhabitants of the Rhineland, on our own land—this hospitality was indeed "disgracefully" abused by the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. We believe that we have thereby rendered a service to the Rhine Province. We have saved the revolutionary honour of our country. From now on the Neue

Preussische Zeitung alone will enjoy the full right of citizenship in the Rhine Province.

In parting we should like to remind our readers of the words printed in the first issue we published in January:

"The table of contents for 1849 reads: Revolutionary rising of the French working class, world war."3

And in the East, a revolutionary army made up of fighters of all nationalities already confronts the alliance of the old Europe represented by the Russian army, while from Paris comes the threat of a "red republic".

Written by Marx on May 18, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^1]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 301, May 19, 1849

[^2]: a Marx, "The Revolutionary Movement" (present edition, Vol. 8, p. 215).— Ed.



