---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "141. To the Workers of Cologne "
Page_Range: "498-504"
---

# 141. To the Workers of Cologne 



**[p. 467]**

TO THE WORKERS OF COLOGNE385

Finally we warn you against any revolt in Cologne. In the military situation obtaining in Cologne you would be irretrievably lost. You have seen in Elberfeld that the bourgeoisie sends the workers into the fire and betrays them afterwards in the most infamous way. A state of siege in Cologne would demoralise the entire Rhine Province, and a state of siege would be the inevitable consequence of any rising on your part at this moment. The Prussians will be frustrated by your calmness.

In bidding you farewell the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung thank you for the sympathy you have shown them. Their last word everywhere and always will be: emancipation of the working class!

The Editorial Board of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung

[^1]: Written on May 18, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 301, May 19, 1849





£)tgan fret fttmottath.

M 3 0 1 . Ä Ö l l t , »omflag, i><n 19. fltui. 1 8 4 9 .

2lbfd?ieb«mort ber bleuen 9tbeinifici>en 3eitung.

fl VIn offntt S>i<b i" of*"" Bdjintl - 51«fb« Sippe ben Jro« unbbin|u<trnb«n »opn, j t n c j , , r a r m , SRonn , m jrrrijjnm «««.and. ff« fallen t>i< S û i f m unb ïùrf«n 3 " ' " S""«» *'" blifcenbrn Drgt-n. <St roirft auf mtin JJanpt bit 3*ollen ; <R< fallt m i * bit f*L»i»)>Mio« »ifrrlroc IH »ort) im »tetbrii t u f » » : „Bit (Srb.Uion !" - <», „,,,(, f,, ^„„b IM,I brr fltipi9<n *anb. S e t frt>inu(,u,eu IStft Rolmurttn ! S o bin i * mil (Bprrn «t Cca.rn. M i l bvc oartrn, brr frtjini.l.n.ollrn Slii A btm Iiun Frl flog &«' tbblmo e<feofi, 15 gern n>ol)l beftrrntrn mein (Brab mit « a l , Siiun Jfranj o u * bringt ft out Wutn.n unb illu« Km $inl<-rb«!t T"1'" »•« <*H,*t - Ttr 1>rrup. -jafammt 6rm Sjar« - SBIain Unb ft> M««' i U) •"•« ba in mtintt Toft, P u * rè faiifrn bif Ungarn, »« frt>lrft bir <Pfalj ^u rub'n auf mrinrn ÏBunben; (Sine floljt i Hfb.uenlcidjt1 Trti S o l u m mit ilbrr bit »abrtl C«n kobrn fein UBfib unb ftin Xodbltrlrin 9tad>>brr 31rbcit fur tnicb gcrounotn

>Smi 'US.,i«n Ube, bu fampfrnbr SSSrlt. 3Brnn bir It«» firent mi; <Sla* |rrbrtrf)t. ?«un >U6e.ljr rmg.nbrn $trrr! 3 n b.« ftampfr« JBtiitrn unb Älnmmtn S u n *ilb*. u puloirgrfctitoaratr« grlb. SBenn ba« ö o l f frtn icttr« „ 2 * u l b i g ! fprt At, 33un VJbt,or e*n>erttr unb Sperrt! l>ann ftrbn.wir rulrbrr lufatninrn! « u n ?ubr b o * merit fut immrt "Ubc! fl Sit brm « o r t mil Dem 3 * r o m , an bcr Co- i Tnn fit lorn or» CSrift nirtit ihr »ruber! noil, am SNrifin - 58«lb r.tttl 0 mid) rafltlnb m bit »Ob'. <Sinr allltit trtu» ffitfcllin » a l b ftbr b rri|ii,cr tl Mtbrr ' «Wirb btm iptont jtrf»m«ttrtnbtn Oolft ftin H i ' ®rid>i«t, txr Jtrbril U!

F. PRHUGRATH.

0ln bie Arbeiter Aölrrö.

3BII roarnrn (Su* fdili«r>lid! oor |fm 5>ulfd) in Si JIn. flarti 0»r imlilànfdjfn Ca9« Jlilnê »àrtt *r rttiunä«lo« D«rior»n ghr i)»i)t m Gifeisu*. geu Mn, roic Dir Bburjeoiricif Jlrotiitr in« Jeu« frtjicfe uno i'i«r hmcrrhtr auf* Kif Drrlrortjii^il« otrrali), Oer 8ela9<runi}6ji4lanb m Rpib n'iir Of Die ^anjr f Rofmproma unmoralifirrn unb b(r !8<lo9frun9«juftanf u?ar! DK nottirofncigt Jolgt |f Otr lirbfbung otrn limn ©tiif in 0i(!«m 'ui9<nb!iclf. ©it 1>rtuê'n Mr6«n an iîurer Mutw crrjrp«ifcln. Dit "Rreoticuie ötr i Jîfuin SRljfinicn 3fi!unj Pan Frn Sud) bfim Ülbfct KPt fur Pie n Virn bttriflinr Ibeilnohmf. Jihr Itgleô ffiort tfir D ubfral! uni- imincr («in : lî man pipauo n ücartcilcncen Klafft! F i ( SRt Oofucn 6(r 3ieu(n 3îl)tin. j e i t u n g .

[^1]: rr ^ 3ufl 4 Ul ftmt« m n b f u 4 i H n*S M " «r-l K ttt f It, « j o- ( i t * » « 111 * | r i . ^ J b m b 9 t i t

[^2]: * « T »" * a- W "* . * «." 3 *TO " » * • * K» « "> "• "t « n * n 1 * * » a a it« ir

[^3]: >t îîa *l * < * t i n m H um a

[^4]: jit, 8 » « » , c ™' , " , ,*"• » » * « 1 « H a , t t ( » ™ t i r i , 4 i l . S u n i « « K « » t « « • g i ( * > ytf •*

[^5]: _ i 1 t n f t , t f~«—4 m » u » » Ö pllomation on M« ftaue t,*m " s r , e « "° t U t « ™t r t i « « 1 1 " , < ; * s « t * I *

[^6]: ' * fl5,\T*m "T ' « Si V t

[^7]: i» « « » » J C » $ i 1 . „„ . . y. * J S I C H I «

[^8]: The last issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (No. 301, May 19, 1849) which was

[^9]: printed in red ink





KARL MARX

and F R E D E R I C K ENGELS

ARTICLES AND STATEMENTS

May-July 1849



