---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "142. K. Marx. Letter to the Frankfurter Journal "
Page_Range: "504-505"
---

# 142. K. Marx. Letter to the Frankfurter Journal 

QDrgun >er Pemohvatic.

J* 12». 9 r a n l f n r t . Samftog, 2 3uni 184(9.

Karl Marx

LETTER TO THE FRANKFURTER JOURNAL

The esteemed Editorial Board of the Frankfurter Journal is requested to print the following statement in its newspaper in large type and in a prominent position, and if this is only possible on payment for its insertion, please obtain the amount from Herr /. Weydemeyer, editor of the Neue Deutsche Zeitung.

Bingen, May 31

Dr. Karl Marx

The Editorial Board of the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" owes its correspondents and the public the statement that it has nothing in common with the news-sheet published in Cologne under the title Westdeutsche Zeitung. The undersigned editorial board reserves to itself the right to communicate further when and where the Neue Rheinische Zeitung will again make its appearance.

The Editorial Board of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Karl Marx, Ernst Dronke, Friedrich Engels, F. Freiligrath, Georg Weerth, F. Wolff, W. Wolff

[^1]: STATEMENT 38b

[^2]: The Statement was published in the Neue Deutsche Zeitung Nos. 129 and 133, June 2 and 7, 1849; and in the Neue Kölnische Zeitung No. 126 (second edition), June 3, 1849

[^3]: Printed according to the newspaper text checked against the manu- script; the covering letter is printed according to the manuscript

[^4]: Published in English for the first time



