---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "143. F. Engels. The Revolutionary Uprising in the Palatinate and Baden "
Page_Range: "505-508"
---

# 143. F. Engels. The Revolutionary Uprising in the Palatinate and Baden 

Nr. 110. JWf«rt«rtet«, Sonatas 3. Suni 1 8 4 9 .

Frederick Engels

[THE REVOLUTIONARY UPRISING IN THE PALATINATE AND BADEN]387

Kaiserslautern, June 2. The counter-revolutionary German news- papers try in every way to cast suspicion on the revolution in the Palatinate and Baden. They are not ashamed to assert that the trend of the entire uprising is tantamount "to betraying" the Palatinate, Baden and, indirecdy, the whole of Germany "to the French". They thereby seek to conjure up afresh the counter-revolutionary hatred of the French stemming from the so-called good old times, believing that in this way they will be able to deprive us of the sympathy of our brothers in North and East Germany. The filthy, lying newspapers which accuse the Palatinate and Baden of having sold themselves to France happen, however, to be precisely those which are in favour of the Russian invasion of Hungary, the Russians' march through Prussia, and even the new Holy Alliance388 between Russia, Austria and Prussia. As proof of this, we name only one of these newspapers: the Kölnische Zeitung.

Thus, the fact that the Russians march into German, into Prussian, territory in order to suppress Hungarian freedom is no betrayal of the country! If the King of Prussia3 concludes an alliance with the Croats and the Russians in order that the last remnants of German freedom shall be trampled under the hooves of Cossack horses, that is no betrayal of the country! If all of us, if the whole of Germany from the Niémen to the Alps is sold by cowardly despots to the Russian Emperor,b that is no betrayal of the country! But if the Palatinate enjoys the sympathy of the French and especially of the

[^1]: a Frederick William IV.— Ed. b Nicholas I.—Ed.



It is true, gendemen "by the grace of God", that the Palatinate and Baden did do all this and neither of them will be ashamed of its actions. Of course, if that is betrayal of the country, then the entire people of the Palatinate and Baden consists of two-and-a-half million traitors to their country. The people of the Palatinate and Baden did certainly not make a revolution in order to support the despots in the imminent great struggle between the free West and the despotic East. The people of the Palatinate, and those of Baden, made their revolution because they do not want to share the guilt of the despicable acts in the destruction of freedom by which Austria, Prussia and Bavaria have so shamefully distinguished themselves in recent months, and because they have not allowed themselves to be misused for the enslavement of their brothers. The army of the Palatinate and Baden joined the movement without reservations; it disclaimed loyalty to the perfidious sovereigns and has to a man sided with the people. Neither the citizens nor the soldiers want to fight in the ranks of the Croats and Cossacks against freedom. If the despots of Olmütz, Berlin and Munich still find soldiers who have sunk so deep as to put themselves on a level with Bashkirs, Pandours,390 Croats and similar predatory rabble, and to fight under the same flag as such hordes of barbarians, so much the worse. It may occasion us sorrow, but we shall never treat such mercenaries as German brothers; we shall treat them as Cossacks and Bashkirs, and it will not worry us if a treacherous imperial ex-Minister of War stands at their head.391

But at the present time when we are on the threshold of a European war, a people's war, it is altogether ludicrous to speak of "betrayal of the country" and similar accusations smacking of demagogue392 hunting. In a few weeks^ perhaps even in a few days, the huge armies of the republican West and the enslaved East will advance against each other to fight out a great struggle on German soil. Germany—to such lengths has she been brought by her sovereigns and the bourgeois—Germany will not be asked at all for her permission. Germany does not want the war, the war will be brought into this country without its consent and it will be unable to



**[p. 476]**

We owe that to the treachery of our sovereigns and the supineness of our people's representatives, and if anything is betrayal of the country, it is that! In short, in the great struggle for freedom which is spreading through the whole of Europe, the Palatinate and Baden will stand on the side of freedom against slavery, of revolution against counter-revolution, of the people against the sovereigns, of revolutionary France, Hungary and Germany against absolutist Russia, Austria, Prussia and Bavaria; and if the wailers393 call that betrayal of the country, in the whole of the Palatinate and the whole of Baden nobody cares two hoots about it.

[^1]: Written on June 2, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

[^2]: First published in Der Bote für Stadt Published in English for the first und Land No. 110, June 3, 1849 time



