---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "145. K. Marx. To the Editor of the Newspaper La Presse "
Page_Range: "511-513"
---

# 145. K. Marx. To the Editor of the Newspaper La Presse 



**[p. 480]**

Karl Marx

TO THE EDITOR OF THE NEWSPAPER

LA PRESSE3

Your item published in La Presse of July 26 concerning my stay in Paris, which has been reprinted word for word by other newspapers, contains such erroneous assertions that I am compelled to write a few lines in reply.

In the first place, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, of which I was the owner401 and editor-in-chief, was never banned. Its publication was suspended only for five days because of the state of siege. When the state of siege was lifted, the newspaper reappeared, and continued to appear during the following seven months. Since the Prussian Government could not see any possibility of legally prohibiting the newspaper it had recourse to a strange measure: It got rid of the owner, that is to say, it forbade me to reside in Prussia.b As regards the legality of this measure, this will be decided by the Prussian Chamber of Deputies which is shortly to meet.

After being forbidden to stay in Prussia, I went first of all to the Grand Duchy of Hesse, in which—as in other parts of Germany—I was not forbidden to reside. I did not go to Paris as a refugee, as your newspaper asserts, but of my own accord with a regular passport and with the sole aim of collecting additional material for my work on the history of political economy, which I had begun already five years earlier.402

[^1]: a Emile de Girardin.— Ed. See this volume, p. 451.— Ed.





**[p. 481]**

This complaint has been handed in and I now await the result.403

Kindly accept etc.,

Dr, K. Marx

Written about July 27, 1849 Printed according to the newspaper

First published in the newspaper IM Presse, Translated from the French July 30, 1849

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: J. A. S. Dufaure.— Ed.



