---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "146. F.  Engels Repudiation "
Page_Range: "513-518"
---

# 146. F.  Engels Repudiation 



**[p. 482]**

Frederick Engels

REPUDIATION404

It has come to the ears of the undersigned, who served in Willich's volunteer corps during the campaign in the Palatinate and Baden, that the following accusations are being made against that corps:

1) Willich's corps is said to have deserted Becker's in the Black Forest405;

2) it is said not to have acknowledged Becker as commander-in- chief;

3) it is said to have crossed into Switzerland whilst Becker's corps was still eight German miles3 behind.

As regards the first accusation, let the following facts speak for themselves: Willich was positioned in Furtwangen with orders to hold the Simonswalder Thai and the defiles leading to the Höllenthal. He advanced the larger part of his troops over the mountains towards Simonswald and St. Märgen. Becker was positioned in Triberg and St. Georgen, on Willich's right. To our great astonishment Becker suddenly appeared in Furtwangen with his whole corps. He explained this strange manoeuvre to Willich by saying that the troops stationed in Triberg had left their posts in defiance of their officers and he himself had gone after them, from St. Georgen, to persuade them to re-occupy Triberg. And in fact Becker and his corps did march off again towards evening. Meanwhile Willich went to headquarters in Donaueschingen to see how matters stood. The enemy, who had broken through to Villingen by crossing Württemberg, had already reconnoitred the territory up the road. In Donaueschingen it was first of all intended to take up a position near Hüf ingen, an hour's march further back;

[^1]: a In the manuscript the word "German" is written in pencil. For the "German mile" see footnote on p. 20.—Ed.





**[p. 483]**

The second accusation refers to the fact that the captain of one of Willich's companies stationed in Furtwangen refused to leave the post where Willich had stationed him and to march with Becker. He acted righdy. Willich's corps had formed voluntarily and had put itself voluntarily under Willich's command. It consisted exclusively of men who knew what they were fighting for. It is self-evident that such a corps ceases to exist if it is broken up and dispersed. Furthermore, Willich had been specifically ordered to hold this position with his corps, and the withdrawal of the company in question would have thwarted all his arrangements.

The third accusation has even less foundation. It is public knowledge that at the last council of war held in Jestetten406 Becker advocated crossing on to Swiss soil, whereas Willich was for continuing the struggle. It is public knowledge that from Tiengen Becker marched with the main part of the army to Baltersweil while Willich covered his retreat with 350 men and four cannon near

Erzingen, and from Baltersweil to Jestetten whilst Willich occupied the position the army had vacated at Baltersweil. It is public knowledge that Willich remained for a further 24 hours with his corps in this position—the artillery had already left him—whilst Siegel crossed into Switzerland at Rafz and Becker a few hours later at Rheinau; that we only left the position after facing the enemy outposts for several hours without being attacked; that we spent that

[^1]: a In the manuscript: "Lenzkirch"—evidently a slip of the pen.— Ed.





**[p. 484]**

It is by no means our purpose to become involved in the unedifying disputes which have broken out between the various leaders of the Baden army. We merely ask that false reports should not be circulated about our corps and our leaders.

Canton Vaud, July 26, 1849 T, ,. „ . . J 7 Koehler, Captainb

Written by Engels on July 26, 1849

First published in the Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Arbeiterbe- wegung No. 2, 1967

Printed according to the manu- script

Published in English for the first time

[^1]: a July 12, 1849.—Ed.

[^2]: The words "Koehler, Captain" are written in pencil and not in the same handwriting as the manuscript as a whole.— Ed.



APPENDICES



