---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "1. Report on Marx's Expulsion Sent by the Cologne Government Authorities to the Minister of the Interior von Manteuffel "
Page_Range: "518-520"
---

# 1. Report on Marx's Expulsion Sent by the Cologne Government Authorities to the Minister of the Interior von Manteuffel 



**[p. 487]**

REPORT ON MARX'S EXPULSION SENT BY THE COLOGNE GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES

TO THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR

VON MANTEUFFEL

Meanwhile Marx is still staying here, although furnished with neither residence permit nor card, and the newspaper of which he is editor continues with its destructive tendencies, deriding and ridiculing all that men normally respect and hold sacred, and urging the overthrow of the existing constitution and the establishment of a social republic, and its effects are all the more damaging since its impertinence and humour constandy attract new readers.

The earlier investigation into his affairs resulted in his acquittal, as did the one subsequendy opened against him for direct incitement to rebellion.407

The commandant of the local fortress has now called on the police authorities to expel Marx from here as a dangerous person. We enclose the application in question, along with the report of the Police Superintendent,3 and we can only concur with the latter's view that his expulsion from this town without his simultaneous removal from the Prussian state would achieve nothing; nor do we see any objection to proceeding forthwith with Marx's expulsion if he gives any specific cause. Whether on tlie other hand it would be expedient to expel him at the present moment merely on the grounds of the dangerous tendencies of the newspaper which he has been editing in like manner for some considerable period, appears to be more doubtful. It is possible that taking such a step might provoke a demonstration by the democratic party in sympathy with Marx. For this reason and because the Royal Ministry of the Interior had

[^1]: Geiger. See also this volume, pp. 496-97.— Ed.



Written on March 10, 1849 Printed according to the manu- script

First published in the Frankfurter Zeitung Published in English for the first und Handelsblatt No. 176, June 27, 1913 time

[^1]: a Presumably a slip of the pen; it should read September 12.— Ed.



