---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "3. Banquet in Giirzenich "
Page_Range: "521-523"
---

# 3. Banquet in Giirzenich 



**[p. 490]**

BANQUET IN GÜRZENICH

Cologne, March 20. Yesterday evening a banquet was held in Gürzenich to mark the anniversary of last year's barricade batdes in Berlin. Whereas even at the bourgeois concert of March 18 "to celebrate the promise" of a Constitution etc. etc., the biggest hall of our city was fairly well filled, yesterday there was not room enough to hold half the public streaming towards it. While 5,000-6,000 persons stood crowded in the hall side by side, several thousand more tried in vain to get in. The hall had filled so rapidly that even a number of speakers succeeded only after 9 o'clock in forcing their way through.

Karl Schapper was in the chair and opened the meeting with a toast to the sovereign people, the sole source of all legal power. Further toasts were drunk as follows: H. Becker, to the memory of those who died on March 18 and 19; Citizen Wächter, to the improvement of the German Michel; Citizen Weyli. to the complete revolution, not an incomplete one; Citizen Ritlinghausen: to the downfall of the German Emperor; C. Cramer, to the democratic women present at our banquet; W. Wolff, editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung: to the Jiaiiati republics; E. Dronke, editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, to the proletarian revolution; P. Nothjung. to the victory of the Magyars and Kossuth; H. Bürgers, editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, to the eve» throw of Austria. F. Wolff, editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. to the accused on triai in Bourges410; F. Engels, editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, to the June insurgents in Paris; K. Schapper. to the English Chartists and their revolutionary leaders, Ernest Jones and G. J. Harney; Carl Cramer: to the Poles; Chr. Esser, editor of the Arbeiter-Zeitung3: to the Red Republic.

[^1]: a i.e. the newspaper Freiheit, Brüderlichkeit, Arbeit.—Ed.





**[p. 491]**

First published in the Neue Rheinische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 251, March 21, 1849

Published in English for the first time

