---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "7. Letter from the Royal Government Authorities in Cologne to the Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province, Herr Eichmann, Regarding the Expulsion of Marx "
Page_Range: "527-529"
---

# 7. Letter from the Royal Government Authorities in Cologne to the Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province, Herr Eichmann, Regarding the Expulsion of Marx 



**[p. 496]**

LETTER FROM THE ROYAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES

IN COLOGNE TO THE OBERPRÄSIDENT OF THE RHINE PROVINCE, HERR EICHMANN,

REGARDING THE EXPULSION OF MARX

Cologne, April 19, 1849 re. No. 2474

To the Royal Oberpräsident of the Rhine Province His Honour Herr Eichmann, at Coblenz

We have the honour to communicate to Your Honour a copy, enclosed, of the order issued to the local Police Superintendent relating to the expulsion of the writer Carl Marx, in execution of the directive of 13th inst.

Royal Government Department of the Interior Birck Wenzel

To the Royal Police Superintendent °^ Herr Geiger, in Cologne

Following your report of 1st ult., for which the supporting documents are returned enclosed, we decided to ask the Minister of the Interior concerning the expulsion of Dr. C. Marx, informing him at the same time that although we were in no doubt that his



**[p. 497]**

Cologne, April 19, 1849

Royal Government Department of the Interior (signed) Birck Copy signed Perker

[^1]: First published in the Zeitschrift für Ge- Printed according to the manu- schichtswissenschaft, Berlin, 1969, No. 5 script

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 451.— Ed. b See this volume, pp. 492-93.— Ed.



