---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "14. Engels'Expulsion from Elberfeld "
Page_Range: "539-540"
---

# 14. Engels'Expulsion from Elberfeld 



**[p. 508]**

ENGELS' EXPULSION FROM ELBERFELD

Elberfeld, May 15. The state of affairs remains the same, calm and order was not disturbed yesterday; the appearance of the city was unaltered. Today a poster was pasted up at street corners announcing that the Committee of Public Safety has appointed a Herr von Mirbach as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces*; another announcement of the Committee declares that Herr Engels, one of the editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, has been expelled.3

In another poster the Committee of Public Safety decrees that everywhere only the black-red-and-goldb flag is allowed to be flown, and it calls on towns and villages in the neighbourhood of Elberfeld for assistance. We learn from Essen that the army reserve men there who have returned from leave have gone to Wesel. The private letter which gave us this information adds that a state of siege has been proclaimed in Essen. According to the announcement of the colonel responsible for this action, the reason for it was that he believed he could not mobilise the army reserve in any other way.

[^1]: First published in the Neue Kölnische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 113, May 17, 1849 . Published in English for the first time

[^2]: * In this connection, we are in a position to report that Herr von Mirbach, for reasons which will later become evident, did not accept the position of Commander-in- Chief, and also that for the same reasons Herr Anneke left Elberfeld voluntarily and was not expelled, as has been reported. Dr. Gottschalk, who is supposed to have shared the fate of expulsion with Anneke, has not been in Elberfeld at all, but is living quite peacefully at Bad Ems. [Editorial note in the Neue Kölnische Zeitung.]

[^3]: See this volume, p. 449.— Ed. Colours symbolising Germar imperial Constitution worked out by the Frankfurt National Assembly.— Ed

[^4]: Colours symbolising Germany's unity, here symbolising adherence to the



