---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "15. The Democratic and Workers' Press on Marx's Expulsion and the Suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung "
Page_Range: "540-545"
---

# 15. The Democratic and Workers' Press on Marx's Expulsion and the Suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 



**[p. 509]**

THE DEMOCRATIC AND WORKERS' PRESS ON MARX'S EXPULSION AND THE SUPPRESSION

OF THE -NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG

TRIER'SCHE ZEITUNG

Cologne, May 18 It is rumoured that all democrats who are not domiciled in Cologne will be deported by police action; this measure is said to be primarily aimed at the editorial personnel of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. It is a fact that Karl Marx was already yesterday served with such an order. At midday yesterday, Fr. Engels left for the Rhine Palatinate.423

Cologne, May 19

The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has ceased to exist. Our issue therefore has a black mourning border. The most interesting news items from south arid east pale against

[^1]: First published in the supplement Printed according to the newspaper to the Trier'sche Zeitung No. 120, , , , . - , . , , , r- Mav 20 1849 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: NEUE KÖLNISCHE ZEITUNG

[^3]: From out of the dark did the fatal shaft fly, From ambush blows fell thick and fast— So now in the flower of my manhood I lie, A proud rebel that's breathed his last!

[^4]: F. Freiligrath

[^5]: "Abschiedswort der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung'"1

[^6]: a "Farewell Word of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung", first published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 301, May 19, 1849.— Ed.





**[p. 510]**

And what an appearance it has!!

Red, red, red was ever its batde-cry, but today the whole garb is red. The red print of the newspaper has greatly surprised its read- ers,—the spirit which once more blazes out from these breath-taking lines of print has made us profoundly lament that the newspaper has now ceased to exist!

No other newspaper can henceforth serve us as a substitute for this loss.—We shall seek in vain in the most brilliant periodicals of all countries for articles like those of the blood-stained June of 1848, nowhere shall we find again such conclusive documentation regarding the "good financial administration of Prussia",3 or the "Silesian milliard",b or "Wage Labour and Capital".0 It must be admitted that by the glorious downfall of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung democracy in the Rhineland has suffered a reverse. We mourn—but Freiligrath's poetry, which has attained its everlasting pinnacle in his "farewell word" today, does not leave us without consolation:

Farewell, brothers, but not forever farewell, For the spirit they never can slay! I'll rise up again soon with a rattling of mail, I'll return better armed for the fray!

Cologne, May 19. The last number of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung printed in red ink has just been published here. At last it, too, has succumbed to the blows of divinely-graced Prussianism. Since the Government was unable to get at it by judicial proceedings, and in spite of all provocations it could not find a reason for imposing a state of siege, it finally had to have recourse to deporting its editor-in-chief,*3 and it prepared orders for the deportation or arrest

[^1]: First published in the Neue Kölnische Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 115, May 20, 1849

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: NEUE DEUTSCHE ZEITUNG

[^4]: a Marx, "Prussian Financial Administration under Bodelschwingh and Co." and "Further Contribution on the Old-Prussian Financial Administration" (see present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 379-89, 418-20).— Ed.

[^5]: W. Wolff, "Die Schlesische Milliarde", Neue Rheinische Zeitung, March-April 1849.— Ed.

[^6]: c See this volume, pp. 197-228.— Ed. d Marx.— Ed.





**[p. 511]**

First published in the Neue Deutsche Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 119, May 22, 1849

Published in English for the first time

DEUTSCHE LONDONER ZEITUNG

Cologne, May 19. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung has for the time being ceased publication; its last number today is printed entirely in red. The following order has been issued against its editor-in-chief:

"The tendency of the Neue Rheinische Zeitungto provoke in its readers contempt for the present government, and incite them to violent revolutions and the setting up of a social republic has become stronger in its latest pieces. The right of hospitality which he so disgracefully abused is therefore to be withdrawn from its editor-in-chief, Dr. Karl Marx, and since he has not obtained permission to prolong his stay in these states, he is ordered to leave them within 24 hours. If he should not comply voluntarily with this demand, he is to be forcibly conveyed across the frontier".

Today a poster has been pasted up in the streets of Cologne, inviting attendance at a meeting to discuss the speedy establishment of a new democratic organ.

Such, you constitutional Germans, are your new achieve- ments!—A German, a Prussian, is expelled from Germany "because he abuses hospitality"—a newspaper is suppressed because it spoke the truth, because Prussia's reactionary martial-law newspa- pers were unable to cope with the wit and stylistic acumen of the noble-minded Marx. Yes, Herr von Hohenzollern, the truth told you by the Neue Rheinische Zeitung is painful, very painful—(we shall reproduce in our next issue an article from the newspaper, "The

[^1]: "Cologne, May 11, 1849 _ . „ . . . . Royal Government. Moeller

[^2]: To Herr Geiger, Royal Police Superintendent, here."'

[^3]: See this volume, pp. 496-97.— Ed.





**[p. 512]**

Neue Rheinische Zeitung increased so quickly and was so extensive, and that the paper met with universal approval.

The Hohenzollern on his throne, surrounded by "My glorious army" and with a legion of quill-drivers at his service, trembles before a single democratic newspaper; he cannot sleep in peace because it tells the naked truth —so it must be suppressed.

Things have come to such a pass with the monarchy that it has to proceed to use brute force to suppress a newspaper which, by the irrefutable pungency of its truth, threatened to give the miserable, ailing existence of the monarchy a still more wretched ending!

This is the Prussian guaranteed freedom of the press. Such is the interpretation of the Prussian Constitution—of the German Impe- rial Constitution!

The German kings and princes—gore-dyed with the blood of their "subjects",—are labouring hard for the establishment of the Red Republic. The thrice-perjured King of Prussia1* is determined to earn for himself the tide of "Most Infamous". On the 27th of April, the Prussian Chamber of Representatives was dissolved and the same evening, crowds having collected in the streets, the people were fired on and mercilessly butchered. From that time martial law has been the only law throughout Prussia, arrests are continually taking place, and the prisons are crowded. Early in May, insurrections broke out

[^1]: First published in the Deutsche Londoner Printed according to the newspaper Zeitung No. 217, May 25, 1849

[^2]: Published in English for the first

[^3]: time

[^4]: DEMOCRATIC REVIEW125

[^5]: The article was reproduced in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 218, June 1, 1849.— Ed.

[^6]: b Frederick William IV.— Ed.





**[p. 513]**

That admirable journal, the New Rhenish Gazette, has been forcibly suppressed, and its chief editor, Dr. Marx, expelled from Cologne. The last number of the Gazette appeared on the 19th May, printed in red ink; it proclaimed in every line "war to the knife" against his Prussian kingship, and all the oppressors and betrayers of the German people

First published in the journal Democratic Printed according to the journal Review, Vol. 1, June 1849, p. 25

