---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "19. Trial for Libelling Deputies of the German National Assembly "
Page_Range: "548-552"
---

# 19. Trial for Libelling Deputies of the German National Assembly 



**[p. 517]**

TRIAL FOR LIBELLING DEPUTIES OF THE GERMAN NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

Proceedings of the session of the Police Court of the Royal Provincial Court in Cologne on May 29, 1849.

The persons here listed:

Georg Weerth, writer, Dr. Carl Marx, formerly editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Joh. Wilh. Dietz, proprietor of a printing-press,

Hermann Korff, formerly responsible manager of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Arnold Bechtold, foreman at the Langen printing works, Dr. Herrn. Becker, lawyer, Dr. Ernst Dronke, writer, were summoned as of today to answer charges of libelling deputies of the German National Assembly. Of the accused, only Dietz, Korff, Bechtold and Becker appeared; the court will therefore find against those absent in contumaciam.3

The representative of the Public Prosecutor's office, State Public Prosecutor Boiling, set out the substance of the indictment. G. Weerth, he said, is accused: of having libelled Prince Lichnowski in the short novel entitled Leben und Taten des berühmten Ritters Schnapphahnski [Life and Deeds of the Famous Knight Schnapphahnski], printed in the literary section of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in the months of August and September last year, by imputing to him actions which, if they were true, would bring him into disrepute or render him liable for prosecution. Dr. Carl Marxis similarly accused of libelling Prince

[^1]: a In their absence.— Ed.



The accused, questioned more closely by the presiding magistrate, made the following statements:

Dietz admitted having printed the contentious articles. He did not know who the authors were. He maintained, however, that he was not responsible for the content of those articles, since the editor and responsible manager of the newspaper were known and living in Prussia. If Dr. Marx had recently been expelled from the country,



**[p. 519]**

Korff conceded he was manager of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. The contentious articles were accepted with his approval. His defence counsel, barrister Rath, sought to demonstrate that there was no libel in the articles concerned. He named their author and maintained that as a result his client was absolved of all responsibility.

Dr. Becker admitted having passed to Bechtold for printing the proclamation from the Eiser Hall, which had been sent to him by a messenger-boy from the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. The content of the proclamation in question had however been unknown to him as he had not been present at the proceedings in the Eiser Hall on September 20. As secretary of the Democratic Association429 he was charged with attending to all material for printing, and that was why the manuscript had been sent to him. Moreover the proclamation had already been published by the Neue Rheinische Zeitungbefore he had passed the manuscript to Bechtold. The defendant declared that in certain circumstances he would be ready to assume responsibility for the contents of the proclamation. In his statement he also drew attention to the fact that the indictment had been brought at the request of the Imperial Minister of Justice. The indictment, he submitted, was not directed at specific persons but at a specific party. When he attempted to elaborate on this, the speaker was asked by the presiding magistrate, at the twice repeated instance of the State Public Prosecutor, to keep to the point at issue.

Bechtold admitted that he had read the manuscript received from Dr. Becker and had forwarded it for printing. His defence counsel, barrister Pheiffer, thereupon argued that as the author of the proclamation was known, the printer could not be punished. If the prosecution intended to adduce Article 60 of the Penal Code, it would have to demonstrate that the accused intended to libel the deputies, and the Public Prosecutor's office had not even attempted to prove this. Moreover, the proclamation did not contain a libel in the legal sense, it did not contain any specific assertion which exposed the deputies to prosecution at law, nor to hatred and contempt; it only expressed a criticism of the resolution concerning the armistice.

Hereupon the State Public Prosecutor Boiling, in a lengthy speech, sought to justify the indictment and to refute the arguments used by the accused in their defence. In conclusion, he asked that the accused Weerth, Marx, Dronke, and Korff should each be sentenced to a three-month term of imprisonment and to a fine of 1,000 francs, and



**[p. 520]**

Hereupon the court adjourned and after deliberations lasting about two hours pronounced judgment to the effect that Korff was sentenced to a one-month imprisonment for libelling the deputy Stedtmann, the charge against Weerth was dismissed because the accusations made in it were not specified, and the remaining accused were acquitted.

First published in the supplement Printed according to the newspaper to the Kölnische Zeitung No. 129, May 31, 1849 Published in English for the first time

