---
Volume: 9
Document_Title: "25. Notification Sent by the Commissioner of Police Stating That Marx's Petition Was Rejected "
Page_Range: "558-564"
---

# 25. Notification Sent by the Commissioner of Police Stating That Marx's Petition Was Rejected 



**[p. 527]**

NOTIFICATION SENT BY THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE STATING THAT MARX'S PETITION

WAS REJECTED

Monsieur Marx, Prussian refugee, rue de Lille

Quartier du Faubourg St. Germain Paris, August 16, 1849 Sir,

In fulfilment of the orders of the Prefect of Police3 I have the honour to inform you that the Minister of the Interior6 has not thought it possible to acdede to the petition you have addressed to him requesting him to revoke his decision. Consequently, I require you to leave Paris without delay in order to proceed to the department of Morbihan, where you must reside.

I have the honour to greet you,

Commissioner of Police of the Quartier du Faubourg Saint-Germain

Dourlens

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu- Works, Second Russian Edition, script Vol. 43, Moscow 1976 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Carlier.— Ed. b Dufaure.— Ed.









[^1]: Passport issued to Marx by the French police on August 24, 1849 because having been expelled from Paris he intended to go to England. It bears the stamp of Boulogne, the port from which Marx embarked for England, and the date August 26, 1849. Marx's description is given on the left-hand side of the passport.

[^2]: Age 32 years Nose Ordinary Height lm. 71 cm. Mouth Medium Hair Black Beard Black Forehead Round Chin Round Eyebrows Brown Face Round Eyes Brown Complexion Ordinary



NOTES

AND INDEXES



