---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "1. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 19 January "
Page_Range: "32-33"
---

# 1. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 19 January 



**[p. 3]**

1874

l

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN1

IN HANOVER

[London,] 19 January 1874

Dear Wenzel,

Engels informed me of your letter to him.2 Hence these lines. After my return 3 a carbuncle broke out on my right cheek, which was operated on; later it had several smaller successors, and I think that at the present moment I am suffering from the last of them.

Incidentally, don't worry at all about newspaper gossip and still less answer it. I myself allow the English papers to announce my death from time to time, without showing any sign of life. Nothing annoys me more than to appear to be supplying the public with reports of my state of health through my friends (you are the great sinner in this respect). I don't give a farthing for the public, and, if my occasional illness is exaggerated, it at least has the advantage that it spares me all sorts of requests (theoretical and otherwise) from unknown people in every corner of the earth.

My best thanks for the kind words from the Lady Countess and Fränzchen.'*

I am very glad to receive the Frankfurter Zeitung and find all sorts of interesting things in it.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: The relative victory of the ultramontanes and Social-Democrats in the elections4 SERVES MR BISMARCK AND HIS MIDDLE-CLASS TAIL RIGHT. More another time.

[^2]: •' Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann

[^3]: 3-406



