---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "3. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 February "
Page_Range: "36-37"
---

# 3. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 February 



**[p. 7]**

not for a year or two. How right that feudal socialist R. Meyer3

was in his contention that the General Association of German Workers would become increasingly international—despite its bosses—was confirmed by the second ballot in Frankfurt when the jackasses finally had to vote for Sonnemann and acted quite correctly: first vote for our own man, and then, if it is clear that he won't get in on the second round, vote for the opponent of the government, whoever he happens to be. This was a very bitter pill for the bosses. But history has its laws, and even the mighty Hasenclever cannot prevail against them.

You have already had news of Marx. He is better, but still needs to take care not to overwork. This morning we went out walking on Hampstead Heath, something he ought to do every day; however, it shows you that there is no question of his having to remain indoors, etc.

I assume that the Reichstag will just let you serve out your sentence, so it would be very good if Jacoby were to be elected.9

I intended writing something about Germany for the Volksstaat, but have been so involved in economic and statistical material that it threatens to become a small, or even a full-size, book.10

Best wishes to Bebel.

Your

F. E.

3

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 14 February 1874 Dear Sorge,

Just a very hasty note to let you know that around a fortnight ago I sent you 1 parcel with 12 Alliancesh and the day before

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, „ , , - , • • ,• , <• , ••• joso Published in English for the lirst time

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a R. H. Meyer, Der Emancipationskampf des vierten Standes, Vol. 1, Berlin, 1874, p. 120. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association.



