---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "4. Engels to Wilhelm Bios. 21 February "
Page_Range: "37-38"
---

# 4. Engels to Wilhelm Bios. 21 February 



**[p. 8]**

yesterday, 2 parcels, each with 50 copies of the English Rules,3 i.e. 100 in all.

I have managed to get hold of around three hundred copies of the German Rules here, and the English Federal Council has promised me a further 400-500 English ones. As soon as I have them, I shall send you the whole lot, together with some Alliances, per PARCELS COMPANY. The post is becoming too expensive; the English Rules cost 4 shillings! To save you problems with customs duties I shall refer to you on the cover as GENERAL SECRETARY, I.W.A.

It was obvious that the New York movement would slip out of your hands as soon as PUBLIC MEETINGS and other demonstrations replaced real work and organisation.

I suppose the German gentlemen will have found out by now what it means to join forces with the Yankee swindlers.

Your

F. Engels

More soon!

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , . ,. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

ENGELS TO WILHELM BLOS

London, 21 February 1874

Dear Friend Bios,

[^1]: IN LEIPZIG

[^2]: Things received with thanks. I enclose the article on the English elections.11 The first of a series on the Military Lawc will follow in a few days; the secondd as soon as I have obtained a copy of Moltke's speech.

[^3]: a K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - b F. Engels, 'The English Elections'. - c F. Engels, 'The Imperial Military Law. I'. - d F. Engels, 'The Imperial Military Law. II'.



