---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "5. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 February "
Page_Range: "38-39"
---

# 5. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 February 



**[p. 9]**

Jacoby's conduct is irresponsible.9 If he did not wish to take up his seat he should have requested the Party Committee in advance just to put him forward as a mere 'name' in completely hopeless constituencies. The workers have neither the money nor the time to squander on empty gestures of this sort. The most strenuous efforts will be needed to get Bracke in, and victory there is doubly important since it is in a rural constituency. Jacoby has disqualified himself for good with this. The man is just too much of a sage. And his reasons are so trivial and vulgar-democratic! He hurls abuse at force as something reprehensible in itself, even though we all know that, when it comes down to it, nothing can be achieved without force. If Lob Sonnemann had written such things, that would not be so bad, or Karl Mayer of the Schwäbischer Beobachter—but a candidate of our party! However, it is a good thing that he has reduced himself to the level of a mere 'name'.

And in fact it is all very fine and logical: on the one hand, he rejects force, on the other, parliamentary legal action—what is left then but pure Bakuninist abstention?

Yours in friendship,

F. E.

Liebknecht's letter arrived yesterday.

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

London, 27 February 1874

Dear Sorge,

The things listed on the back of this letter were sent off to you today in a parcel addressed to F. A. Sorge, * General Secretary I.W.M. Association, 25 Hudson Street, Hoboken, N.J. via New York, per Continental Parcels Express Company (W. Wheatley & Co.—

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Bolshevik, Printed according to the original No. 13, Moscow, 1932 . . r Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN



