---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "8. Marx to Jenny Marx. 19 April "
Page_Range: "42-44"
---

# 8. Marx to Jenny Marx. 19 April 



**[p. 13]**

ey was] collected by him in the name of the firm, and that my very name was not mentioned in Mercurer. This transaction3 T h e judicial proceedings having once begun, I took no step whatever to get at the outstanding debts. You will now have to judge for your- selves whether my proceedings have any analogy with yours. I come now to another point. In your letter you say:

'I have received the money from Dover, the Gardeners' Chronicle and I will send you Collier's Account.'

You do not mention Dickes, but I expect that in your next letter of Monday I shall receive all the details.

In conclusion let me remark that in regard to the legal character of the past proceedings, I have only communicated to you not my own view, which is not yet at all settled, but an opinion provisionally expressed by my solicitors, Mr Merriman and Mr Powell, at the interview I had with them, in presence of another gentleman, on Thursday last.b

Yours,

K. Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

8

MARX TO JENNY MARX13

IN LONDON

Ramsgate,' SUNDAY [19 April 1874] 16 Abbot's Hill

Dear Jenny,

16 Abbot's Hill—vis-à-vis M m e Williams—that is the address of the 'CLIFF' where I have lodgings. But NEVER MIND! T h e r e was no price fixed for it either. T h e landlady first asked for £ 1 and then came down to 12 shillings. They are incidentally perfectly decent 'folk'; the man, a COACH BUILDER, seems also to dabble in art. H e

[^1]: a The sentence remained unfinished. - b i.e. 26 March - c Marx took treatment at Ramsgate from mid-April to 5 May 1874.





**[p. 14]**

has painted, and not just daubed, a very idealised and RATHER enigmatic figure who stands guard at the entrance to a certain place. A n d in the middle of the front-garden there is a To M-THu MB-sized clay figure of Napoleon I, standing on a brick pedestal, dressed in black, yellow and red, etc., A VERY MANLY MAN, AND WELL DONE. T h e landlady has a n u m b e r of children, including a six-week-old KABY who often makes his presence felt in a very disagreeable manner.

T h e air here is delightful, but despite all the walking I do, I have not yet managed to get good night's sleep.

T h e place is not quite deserted, but it is the HOME BREWED PEOPLE who are most in evidence, as yet.

I hope that Jennychen is feeling better a n d that the EXCELLENT LITTLE MAN" is not suffering too much with his teeth. Both mother and son are constantly in my mind.

Apropos. Tell Tussychen who found Tennyson's Alexandrovna! so amusing, that there is nothing new under the sun (even though she is sufficiently well versed in the Bible to need no telling). In June 1872 the comte du Nord (subsequently Tsar Paul, the MADMAN, who was travelling under this name) found himself in Paris with his young wife. He was present at a session of the Académie Française at which M. de la Harpe read out a poetic epistle to his Altesse impériale}1 Each stanza ended with the word 'Petrovich' (son of Peter), of which Grimm remarks:

Your

[^1]: 'Apostrophe répétée, plus ridicule encore pour les oreilles russes qu'elle n'est étrange pour les nôtres. Ce mot, lorsqu'il n'est pas précédé de quelque épithète qui le distingue, est aussi familier en russe que le serait celui de Toinette ou de Pierrot en français'.0

[^2]: Tussy will be doing Tennyson a great favour if she sends this piece of information to the Quiddities and Oddities Journal. GIVE MY THANKS TO ENGELS FOR HIS LETTER.15 Such a punctilious correspondent is seldom met with in our temps corrompu? Adio and greetings to everyone.

[^3]: Karl First published in Annali, an. 1, Milano, Printed according to the original 1958

[^4]: a Charles Longuet - b Imperial Highness - c 'The repetition of this name is even more ridiculous in Russian ears than it is strange in ours. Unless preceded by some distinguishing epithet, the word is as common in Russian as Toinette or Pierrot would be in French.' See F. M. Grimm, Correspondance littéraire, philosophique et critique de Grimm et de Diderot, depuis 1753 jusqu'en 1790, Vol. 11, Paris, 1830, pp. 154-55. - d degenerate age



