---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "10. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 12 May "
Page_Range: "45-46"
---

# 10. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 12 May 



**[p. 10]**

MARX TO MAURICE LACHÂTRE

IN BRUSSELS

[London,] 12 May 1874

Dear Citizen,

It was not until today that I despatched to Paris the proofs3 you sent me. I had a relapse; my doctorb sent me to the seaside resort of Ramsgatec and forbade me to do any work. It is as if the devil himself were involved. Now I am feeling better and hope I shall at last get it finished. There will be some three more instalments in all (including the instalment I have begun).17

I am much obliged to you for your amendments, etc. I have altered the sentence to which you drew my attention.

You will remember that I wrote to you in St Sebastian saying that Bismarck was backing Thiers, but that the Prussian ambas- sador, Arnim, was, with the King'sd support, conspiring with the royalists. Bismarck has finally toppled Arnim and caused him to be recalled from Paris.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

Roy's manuscript was finished long ago, but as the whole thing had to be reworked from start to finish, the printere in Paris has not yet received my version, of which only the draft has been done.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a of the French edition of the first volume of Capital - b Eduard Gumpert - c Marx took treatment at Ramsgate from mid-April to 5 May 1874. - d William I - e Louis Justin Lahure



