---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "11. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 18 May "
Page_Range: "46-48"
---

# 11. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 18 May 



**[p. 11]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN1

IN HANOVER

[London,] 18 May 1874

Dear Kugelmann,

I have received everything: your letters (including some kind lines from your dear wife and Fränzchen3), the 'Meyer' (police- socialist, faiseur,h literary scribbler),18 the cuttings from the Frankfurter, etc., and finally a letter from Madame Tenge.

I am very grateful to you, your family and Madame Tenge for the kind interest in my progress. But you do me an injustice if you ascribe my failure to write to any other cause than shaky state of health, which continually interrupts my work, then goads me on to make up for the time lost by neglecting all other duties (letters included), and finally puts a man out of humour and makes him disinclined to activity.

After my return from Harrogate3 I had an attack of carbuncles d'abord, then my headaches returned, insomnia, etc., so that I had to remain from the middle of April to 5 May in Ramsgate (SEASIDE).0 Since then I have been feeling much better, but am far from being quite well. My specialist (Dr Gumpert in Manchester) insists upon my going to Karlsbadd and would like to make me travel there as soon as possible, but I must finally complete the French translation! which has come to a full stop, and, apart from that, I should much prefer it if I could meet you there.

In the meantime, while I was unable to write, I worked through a lot of important new material for the second volume.e But I cannot start on its final composition until the French edition is completed and my health fully restored.

So I have by no means yet decided how I shall spend the summer.

The progress of the German labour movement (ditto in Austria) is wholly satisfactory. In France the absence of a theoretical foundation and of practical COMMON SENSE is very evident. In England at the moment only the agricultural labourers' movement

[^1]: a Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann - b mountebank - c See this volume, pp. 13- 14. - d Czech name: Karlovy Vary.- e of Capital





**[p. 18]**

In the United States our party has to fight against great difficulties, partly economic, partly political, but is making headway. The greatest obstacle there are the professional politi- cians, who immediately try to falsify every new movement and change it into a new 'floatation business' ['Gründungsgeschäft'].

Notwithstanding all diplomatic moves, a new war is inevitable au peu plus tôt, au peu plus tard,h and before its conclusion there are hardly likely to be any violent popular movements anywhere, or, at the most, they will remain local and unimportant.

The visit of the Russian emperorc is giving the London police a great deal to do and the government here will be glad to get rid of the man as soon as possible.21 As a precautionary measure it requisitioned forty police (mouchards6), with the notorious police commissioner Bloche at their head (Ali Baba and the forty thieves), from the French government, to watch the Poles and Russians here (during the Tsar's stay). The so-called amnesty petition of the Poles here is the work of the Russian embassy; in answer to it the Poles here issued an address, written and signed by Wroblewski, which is aimed at the English and which has been distributed in large numbers at the Sunday MEETINGS in Hyde Park. The English press (with very few exceptions) is obsequious—the Tsar is after all 'OUR GUEST'; but for all that the real feeling against Russia is incomparably more hostile than it has been since the Crimean War,22 and the entry of a Russian princesse into the royal family has aroused rather than disarmed suspicion. The facts— the arbitrary abrogation of the decisions concerning the Black Sea in the Paris Treaty,23 the conquests and trickeries in Central Asia, etc.—irritate John Bull, and Disraeli has no chance of remaining at the helm for any length of time if he continues Gladstone's unctuous foreign policy.

[^1]: a in a speech on 3 September 1872 (see The Hague Congress of the First International- Minutes and Documents, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976, p. 37) - b sooner or later - c Alexander II - d spies - c Maria Alexandrovna



