---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "12. Engels to Gottfried Ermen. 1 June "
Page_Range: "48-50"
---

# 12. Engels to Gottfried Ermen. 1 June 



**[p. 19]**

Your

K. M.

First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Nr. 25, Stuttgart, 1901-1902 and in full, in Russian, in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters from Marx to Kugel- mann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

12

ENGELS TO GOTTFRIED ERMEN

IN MANCHESTER

London, 1 June 1874

Dear Sir,

A fortnight's absence from London, and subsequently a slight cut in my hand which however disabled me for some time from writing, have caused some delay in my replying to your letter of the 16th April.

When, in 1869, we discussed the conditions on which ultimately I left the business,24 I certainly gave you reason to hope that, even after the lapse of the five years stipulated, I might consent to allow you to retain my name in the firm. But this was always made dependent upon certain contingencies.

Had these contingencies been realised, I should have been quite willing, on application, to allow you to continue the use of my name in the firm.

But certainly, no word ever uttered by me could have induced you to consider yourself entitled to continue using my name after the 30th instant as a matter of course, and without my express permission.

The principal amongst these contingencies were:

1) That there should occur no collisions between the Manchester house, and that of my brothers" in Barmen. I am glad to say, that

[^1]: a Hermann and Rudolf Engels

[^2]: 4-406





**[p. 20]**

2) That Mr Acton's views as to my not incurring any liability should prove correct.

Now I have consulted upon this point ever so many lawyers, and they are one and all unanimous as to my responsibility for all the debts of the firm so long as I allow my name to remain in the firm.

If you would be good enough to send me Mr Acton's opinion on the point written by himself, I believe I could make short work of this misunderstanding.

The point is so notorious, that it is laid down in plain terms in all handbooks on the law of partnership. I quote from one by a barrister of high reputation:

'If any retiring partner consent to be held out to the public as connected with the firm, as for instance by allowing his name to be written over the shop, or used in the advertisements or invoices of the firm, he will continue liable'

So that, if there can be anything positive in English Law (which I should not risk to assert), it must be this point.

But even supposing Mr Acton to be right on this point, and all the other lawyers wrong, the contrary opinion of the others would merely prove the point to be such a knotty one that, if the very improbable case now under consideration should ever occur, and if my money should not go to the Creditors, it would surely go to the Chancery Lawyers.25

However, I shall be quite willing to give my consent to the old firm being continued for a period not extending beyond the 30th June 1875, on the condition of your giving me a distinct promise, that after the 30th of September 1875 my name shall not any longer appear as that of a partner on any goods sent out by the firm.

You see I am quite willing to do everything to facilitate the change of firm, giving you the use of my name there, where it is of most value to you, on the tickets and wrappers, for three months longer than you ask for.

Hoping that this letter will find you in good health and spirits, I remain

Yours very truly,

Fr. Engels

[^1]: First published in: M. Jenkins, Frederick Reproduced from the original Engels in Manchester [Manchester, 1951]



