---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "14. Marx to Engels. 15 July "
Page_Range: "50-52"
---

# 14. Marx to Engels. 15 July 



**[p. 13]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN '

IN HANOVER

[London,] 24 June 1874

Dear Kugelmann,

I have at last decided to go to Karlsbad in the middle of August with my youngest daughter Eleanor (known as Tussy). You must therefore see about lodgings and inform me approximately how much it will cost per week. What happens later will depend on circumstances.

My best greetings to the Lady Countess and Fränzchen.3

Your

K. M.

The Austrian government would be stupid enough to put difficulties in my way; it is therefore advisable to let nobody know anything of the intended journey.

14

Dear FRED,

It is really shameful of me not to have written to you before, but, as is well known, it is very hard to find time when one is absolutely idle. This ISLAND is a little paradise, above all for the gentlemen who have everywhere turned the best-situated land into

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Pisma Printed according to the original Marhsa k Kugelmanu (Letters from Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS26

[^3]: IN RAMSGATE

[^4]: Ryde, 15 July 1874 11 Nelson Street27

[^5]: a Gertrud and Franziska Kugelmann

[^6]: 4*





**[p. 22]**

Religion seems to thrive here among the NATIVES, but apart from that they are practical people. 'VOTE FOR STANLEY, THE RICH MAN', we found on posters all over the district. The Town Council of Ryde, on which various members of the Ryde Pier and Railway Company have seats and whose proceedings replace those of the House of Commons in the local press, is a true model of JOBBING.

Our LANDLORD is a SCRIPTURE READER FOR THE POOR, and his theological library, ABOUT TWO DOZEN VOLUMES, adorns our SITTING-ROOM. Although he is a member of the CHURCH OF ENGLAND, I found Spurgeon's sermons among them. In Sandown, where I took a hot bath, I found a similar LIBRARY in the bathhouse, and one can scarcely move an inch without seeing posters advertising pious MEETINGS. And in fact, the PLEBS here is very poor and seems to seek its chief distraction in the church. It would be quite interesting to investigate how what was originally a community of fishermen became reduced IN NO TIME to this state of religious self-abasement. It is certainly not the result of 'over-population', since all told there are not even 100,000 genuine inhabitants.

My health is improved, above all no pills required. But my head, despite everything, is still not completely right.

Unfortunately, she had to return again on Monday evening. When we went down to the pier to see her off, we witnessed the arrival from Brighton of a Temperance gang back from an excursion. Half of them were drunk. As an old Englishman next to me remarked, it was 'THE WORST LOT HE HAD EVER MET WITH IN HIS LIFE', and neither have I ever actually experienced such a mob of stunted, loutish and smutty-minded idiots all at once, the women as ugly as sin, all of them 'young people'. For FOREIGNERS this SAMPLE of FREEBORN BRITONS would have been an amazing sight.

It is a matter of great regret that the Emperor of Russiab didn't break his neck in Saxony. You will have seen from the newspaper reports that if the Russians promised to give Bismarck a European sanction for his Articles of War at the Brussels Congress, what they really intended was to take up the issue of MARITIME RIGHTS 2S on the basis of their earlier preparatory work in Paris (1856).c If

[^1]: Laurachen gave us great pleasure with her visit last Saturday.3

[^2]: a 11 July - b Alexander II - c See this volume, p. 18.



