---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "16. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 23 July "
Page_Range: "54-56"
---

# 16. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 23 July 



**[p. 25]**

would be a sheer FLUKE, a lucky shot at billiards, and up to now this Assembly hasn't a single FLUKE to its credit.

What a financier this Magne is, wanting to squeeze even more money from already overstrained indirect taxes! And he was the financial wizard of the Second Empire! Gambetta really looks very dignified in comparison, as he stands there with his big drum with which to convert the three men of principle, Blanc, Quinet & Co.! And the beaten Italians and the beaten French celebrate the 'supremacy of the Latin race' in Avignon and Arqua over the corpse of Petrarch!34 While at the same time the German philistine revels in the Kulturkampf55 and his English equivalent gets drunk for CHURCH AND STATE. VERILY the ruling classes are going to seed at the same rate everywhere, and even our German citizens do not lag behind the times in this respect.

Best regards.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

16

MARX TO MAURICE LACHÂTRE

[London,] 23 July 1874 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

My dear Fellow Citizen,

After receipt of your last letter but one,36 I myself informed Rochefort of its contents, but he had already made an agreement with the English publisher who brings out the Lanterne anglo- française in London.

As to the delay with our publication,* you may rest assured that no one is more distressed by it than I am. It is not, as you appear to imagine, merely a question of details and of minor corrections

[^1]: IN BRUSSELS

[^2]: a of the French edition of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 26]**

of style; rather I had, indeed am still having, to do virtually the whole thing over again. Once condemned to this thankless task I added here and there some important new developments," which will give the French edition—as I shall incidentally point out in the afterword — a value not possessed by the German original.3 As to my French friends, they can only be of use on a few points of phraseology.

My earlier letters must have convinced you that physical weakness alone has prevented my finishing it. My health has been further aggravated by family misfortunes: Mrs Longuet's only child, a little angel ten months old,b has been taken from us by a sudden choleric attack, while my youngest daughter0 has been suffering for months past from a serious illness.

However my physician"1—who has given me strict instructions to refrain for the time being from work of any kind—says that a stay at Karlsbad and the taking of its mineral waters will effect a complete cure. I leave on the 15th of August, so that I shall be able to resume work at the end of September, and you have my guarantee that the task will be finished by the end of November.37

At present the delay cannot be of much importance, seeing that the dead season has begun.

In any case, the previous delays, for which I was in no way responsible, and the total lack of publicity occasioned by the state of affairs in Paris, had long since killed off sales by instalment.38 I have in my hands a letter from you (from San Sebastian) in which you say so categorically, adding that it would be impossible to set things in motion again until after the sale of the complete work.

I shall always be most grateful for the interest you have taken in this publication and for the patience with which you have put up with tiresome incidents. The need for a scientific basis for socialism is making itself increasingly felt in France, as everywhere else.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in the newspaper Les Printed according to the news- Lettres françaises, No. 310, Paris, 4 mai paper 1950

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See present edition, Vol. 35. - b Charles Longuet - c Eleanor Marx - d Eduard Gumpert



