---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "18. Marx to Engels. 4 August "
Page_Range: "56-57"
---

# 18. Marx to Engels. 4 August 



**[p. 17]**

ENGELS TO JENNY LONGUET

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 2 August 1874 11 Abbot's Hill

My dear Jenny,

I was sorry I did not see you again before my return and now write to you to remind you of your promise to come over here for a short time.39 We are staying here till Tuesday fortnight and can accommodate you any day. After all you have gone through both bodily and mentally during these last weeks, it is absolutely necessary for you to have some change of air and change of scene, and I am sure you require the seaside quite as much as Mohr and Tussy require Karlsbad. Do take me for your doctor for the nonce and let me prescribe a short term of sea air for you. The sooner you come the better it will be for you. Mrs E.a was quite vexed I had not brought you with me there and then. She and Pumps send their loves to you.

Please remember me to Longuet and believe me yours ever faithfully and affectionately

F. Engels

18 MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 4 August 1874

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, .. , r ,• Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN RAMSGATE

[^3]: DEAR FRED, Jennychen will join you the day after tomorrow; she'll probably leave by the 12 a.m. train from Maitland Station, Kentish Town. I shall come down with her for the day.39

[^4]: a Lizzie Burns



