---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "20. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 4 August "
Page_Range: "60-61"
---

# 20. Marx to Ludwig Kugelmann. 4 August 



**[p. 20]**

MARX TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN ]

IN HANOVER

[London,] 4 August 1874

Dear Kugelmann,

About a week ago I wrote your dear wife a few lines,12 telling her of the death of my only grandson3 and the serious illness of my youngest daughter.b This was not an isolated but rather an acute outbreak of an illness from which she has long suffered. Eleanor is now up again, much sooner than her doctor (Madame Dr Anderson-Garrett) had dared to hope. She is able to travel, though of course still delicate. Madame Anderson thinks the Karlsbad waters will help considerably to restore her health, just as Dr Gumpert ordered rather than recommended me to go there. It is naturally difficult for me to leave Jennyc now (I mean IN ABOUT two weeks). I am in this respect less stoical than in others and family afflictions always hit me hard. The more one lives, as I do, almost cut off from the outside world, the more one is entangled in the emotional life of one's own circle.

for not answering their kind and affectionate letters.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: You must send me your exact Karlsbad address by all means and, in particular, make my excuses to your wife and Fränzchend

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Pisma Printed according to the original Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters from Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^3]: a Charles Longuet - b Eleanor Marx - c Longuet - d Gertrud and Franziska Kugel- mann



