---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "23. Marx to Engels. 14 August "
Page_Range: "62-63"
---

# 23. Marx to Engels. 14 August 



**[p. 33]**

In general, it would be good if you could write to her more frequently; you know how much she is attached to you.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

23

MARX TO ENGELS44

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 14 August 1874

DEAR FRED,

I suppose you will have received the letter 12 I posted to you last Tuesday3? If not, we shall have to ask the Post Office to look into it, since another letter that Tussychen wrote likewise failed to arrive.

On going through the accounts with my wife yesterday, it turned out that she had had many additional expenses. So I gave her some of the money intended for my trip43: £16.5sh. for the LANDLORD and £15 for herself. For the moment I do not need more than what is left after I have made various purchases for the journey, and since I do not expect to be leaving Karlsbad before 18 or 20 September, you could send me what money I need then out of the next quarter's allowance.

However, it is very improbable that I shall be able to stay in Karlsbad. Last week there was a trial in Vienna where the accused was indicted on a number of counts, including the charge that he had sent a photograph of the 'Social Communist K.M.' (as the prosecutor described me) to London. Admittedly, this charge was not held by the court to be a criminal act.

New arrests have been made at all the Russian universities,45 and it is obvious that throughout Europe the attempt is being made once again to turn the 'International' into a bogey.

[^1]: a 11 August



