---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "24. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 14 August "
Page_Range: "63-66"
---

# 24. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 14 August 



**[p. 34]**

Tussy is feeling much better; her appetite is growing in geometric PROPORTION, but it is the characteristic feature of these women's ailments in which hysteria plays a part; you have to pretend not to notice that the invalid is again living on earthly sustenance. This too becomes unnecessary once recovery is complete.

The carbuncle did not develop into anything big, but it did go deep. Since yesterday the discharge has quite stopped, so it is starting to heal. A real blessing that I did not set off earlier. It could have been really unpleasant while travelling. HOWEVER, it was idiotic of Longuet to write about it to Jennychen. If there is any harassment in Karlsbad, I suppose I shall be compelled to beat a retreat to Hamburg. Borkheim is away.

With best regards to all.

Your

K. M.

Has Jennychen received the Lanterne which I posted off at the same time as the Peasant War*?

If Rochefort fails to produce a good Lanterne this week, he will have to be written off. The French government is doing all that is humanly possible to ridicule other people.

24

[London,] 14 August 1874 My darling Child,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Published according to the sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, original Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO JENNY LONGUET16

[^3]: IN RAMSGATE

[^4]: I think that you will have received at long last the letter12 I addressed to Engels last Tuesday.b If not, enquiries should be

[^5]: 11 F. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany. - b 11 August





**[p. 35]**

made at the Post Office, since such irregularities should not be allowed to pass without comment.

It was very wrong of Longuet to alarm you with the story of my carbuncle. Yesterday morning the so-called core came out, putting an end to the discharge. I then immediately put a plaster on it, which likewise began to have its usual effect. So you can see, my dear child, that all is well in this respect.

As far as my naturalisation is concerned,40 my SOLICITOR had not received any further NEWS from the HOME OFFICE by last night. I shall go and see him again today. Come what may I shall take my departure tomorrow evening.43 At the worst I should find myself forced to retreat from Karlsbad to Hamburg, which would be vexing enough, if only on account of the expense. After a long period in which neither the 'International' nor myself had attracted any attention, it is very curious that my name should have figured again JUST NOW in trials in Petersburg and Vienna, and that ridiculous RIOTS in Italy46 should be connected not only with the 'International' but (see the reports from Rome in today's Daily News3) directly with me. The insinuation of the Rome correspon- dent that the INTERNATIONAL RIOTERS are acting on behalf of the Papists smells very much like a recipe provided by Bismarck.

Yesterday's Evening Standard contained a small LEADER which began with the words: 'THE INTERNATIONAL HAS BEEN SCOTCHED,BUT NOT KILLED.'b This was with reference to the arrest of 80 people in Marseilles,0 something which is said to be secretly linked with the Italian farce, although the true connection was in fact very PALPABLE: Bazaine s'est échappé.4 Donc—as compensation Mac- mahoniste—80 Communards à Marseille sont arrêtés^ The Standard, which at the level of sheer police nastiness can vie with The Daily News, goes on to comment that these REVOLUTIONISTS become very conservative as soon as they can lay hands on the smallest bit of property, and that they are nothing but penniless rabble, etc. In the same issue there is a telegram from Marseilles according to which one of the men arrested is a millionaire. BRAVE FELLOWS, THOSE BRITISH GENTLEMEN OF THE FREEST PRESS IN THE WORLD! Moreover, it is a remarkable fact that various French (Parisian) papers which I have

[^1]: a 'International Bands in the Romagna (From Our Own Correspondent), Rome, August 10', The Daily News, No. 8831, 14 August 1874. - b The Evening Standard, 13 August 1874 ('The Internationalist snake has been scotched, not killed' - c The Evening Standard of 13 August 1874 also reported on the arrests in Marseilles, in an item entitled 'The Arrest of Communists at Marseilles'. - '' Bazaine has escaped. Whereupon—as a Mac Mahonist retaliation—80 Communards were arrested in Marseilles.

[^2]: 5-4()ti





**[p. 36]**

seen—including some very conservative ones—do not make any attempt to link the Italian farce with the 'International'.

Now to another topic. Frankel and Utin were here yesterday evening. The latter brought the news that Madame Tomanovsky has got married. (What he was uncertain about—quite between ourselves—was whether her imminent confinement had been prepared before or after the wedding. Nor did he have any details yet about the fortunate husband.a) Frankel was very upset by this unexpected blow.

General Cecilia bored me for 3 to 4 hours the day before yesterday. Among other things, he told me that they (id est^ as we already knew, he and his party, C. Martin) were founding a school for the French refugee children. In it, he said, l'enseignement de l'hygiènec was to play a part, as well as économie sociale, and would I do him the favour of composing A PRIMER for this on the English pattern? He also told me with great indignation that in one of its latest issues Le Figaro had made the grotesque assertion that the Republic had ruined France by its appointment of 4 generals qui s'appellent: Crémieux, Glais-Bizoin, Cecilia— et Lissagaray! I whispered this flattering piece of news into the latter's ear that very evening.

I am just gossiping on because I scarcely dare mention the only subject which interests you. The house is as silent as the grave, now that our little angeld is not there to animate it. I miss him at every turn. My heart bleeds when I think of him, and how can one get such a sweet, lovable little chap out of one's mind! But I hope, my child, that you will be brave for your old man's sake.

Your loving,

[^1]: Adieu, my darling Schwärzchen,e

[^2]: OLD NICK*

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Worts, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964

[^4]: a Ivan Davydovsky - b that is to say - c instruction in hygiene - d Charles, Jenny Longuet's son - e Marx's affectionate name for his daughter Jenny, alluding to her dusky appearance—'schwarz' means black. - f jocular name for Marx



