---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "25. Marx to Engels. 1 September "
Page_Range: "66-67"
---

# 25. Marx to Engels. 1 September 



**[p. 25]**

MARX TO ENGELS16

IN LONDON

Karlsbad, Austria, 1 September 1874 Germania, am Schlossberg

Dear FRED,

By next Wednesday3 I shall have been here for two weeks and my powder, ALIAS MONEY, will just suffice for a third week. If you should write to me, please use the above address, but put Miss Eleanor Marx on the envelope. The cure has done wonders for Tussy; I am feeling better but my insomnia has not yet been overcome.

We are both living in strict accordance with the rules. We go to our respective springs at 6 every morning, where I have to drink seven glasses. Between each two glasses there has to be a break of 15 minutes during which one marches up and down. After the last glass, an hour's WALK, and finally, coffee. Another cold glass in the evenings before bed.

I am not allowed to drink anything but pure Pumpenheimerb; Tussy, on the other hand, DAILY receives a glass of Pilsner beer, which makes me envious. The doctorc prescribed for me by Kugelmann, an Austrian, very like the celebrated General Cecilia in his mannerisms, speech, etc., felt some initial anxiety at the prospect of my staying here. On his advice I have registered as Charles Marx, Privatier,d London, and this 'Privatier7 meant that I had to pay double the usual spa taxes, both for Eleanor and myself, into the worthy municipal treasury. But it did remove the suspicion that I might be the notorious Karl Marx. Yesterday,e

however, I was denounced as such in the Viennese scandal-sheet

Sprudel (a spa paper), and the Polish patriot Count Plater (a good Catholic and liberal aristocrat) was bracketed with me as 'head of the Russian Nihilists'.48 But this has probably come too late, since I already have the municipal receipt for the spa tax I have paid. I could also have lived much more cheaply than where Kugelmann has lodged me, but his arrangements were useful and possibly

[^1]: a 2 September - b i.e. water - c probably Ferdinand Fleckles - d private gentle- man - e Marx is mistaken. It should be 'the day before yesterday', i.e. 30 August (see Der Sprudel, No. 18, 30 August 1874).

[^2]: 5*



