---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "27. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 12[- 17] September "
Page_Range: "69-74"
---

# 27. Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 12[- 17] September 

The growing supply of money among certain up-and-coming individuals—one can scarcely speak of strata—in the lower English middle class, and the SPREAD of luxuries and of the affectation of RESPECTABILITY associated with it, could be seen very clearly in Jersey precisely because Jersey is still counted a cheap and hence unfashionable little island. The RESPECTABILITY STANDARD of travellers to Jersey seems to diminish each year—an observation, incidentally, which we made also in Ramsgate, where no one complained about it more bitterly than the wretched barber who cut our hair so short last April.

Nunc autem domine dimittis*—I still have a pile of things to write, and it is time to have this letter registered. Best regards to Tussy, ditto Wenzel.b

Your

Generalc

D 67, 77773 and 4, London, 13 July 1874. 2 £5- BANK OF ENGLAND NOTES, 1st halves enc.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t i m e

27

London, 12[-17] September 1874

Dear Sorge,

The invoice you requested enclosed.1* As far as the German Rules e are concerned, please look in the books to see whether the printing costs for them were paid for by the old General Council

[^1]: ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE52

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a But now, O Lord, dismiss me (cf. Luke 2:29). - b Ludwig Kugelmann - c jocular name for Engels - d See this volume, pp. 44-45. - e K. Marx, Allgemeine Statuten und Verwaltungs- Verordnungen der Internationalen Arbeiterassoziation (K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association).



or not. I think not; they were charged up to me privately by the

Volksstaat and, to the best of my knowledge, I have never been reimbursed. However, if the amount appears in the account book as one laid out by the General Council here, then obviously the copies will be inherited by the new General Council and the balance in its favour vis-à-vis myself rises to £6.3.6. Unless you have any claims on the money, which of course take precedence, the present General Council can use it as it wishes, if you agree. I have advanced £32 for the cost of printing the Alliance1 and shall certainly lose something like half of it, so that there may be a nice little counter invoice at the end of the year. The fact is it would be idiotic to hand the money over to these nonentities who are only there to make sure that everything goes wrong.

With your resignation53 the old International is entirely wound up and at an end anyhow. And that is a good thing. It belonged to the period of the Second Empire, when the oppression through- out Europe prescribed unity and abstention from all internal controversy for the workers' movement, then just reawakening. It was the moment when the common, cosmopolitan interests of the proletariat could come to the fore. Germany, Spain, Italy, and Denmark had only just entered the movement or were entering it. In reality, the theoretical character of the movement in 1864 was still very unclear throughout Europe, that is, among the masses. German communism did not yet exist as a workers' party, the Proudhonism was too weak to be able to insist on its particular fads, Bakunin's new trash did not yet exist even in his own head, and even the leaders of the English TRADE-UNIONS thought they could enter the movement on the basis of the programme laid down in the Considérants* of the Rules.c The first great success was bound to explode this naive conjunction of all factions. This success was the Commune, which was beyond doubt the child of the International intellectually, though the International did not lift a finger to produce it, and for which the International—to that extent with full justification—was held responsible. When, thanks to the Commune, the International became a moral force in Europe, the row began at once. Each tendency wanted to exploit the success for itself. The inevitable decomposition set in. Jealousy of the growing power of the only people who were really ready to continue working along the lines of the old comprehen- sive programme—the German Communists—drove the Belgian

[^1]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - b Preamble - c K. Marx, Provisional Rules of the Associa- tion.



Stahl from Chicago was here. A man of much practical ability, like most German Americans. I liked him in other respects too, but this does not mean that he won't do anything silly in Germany. Even he is not entirely immune to that conciliation nonsense.

The Belgians and the Bakuninists are now holding their congress in Brussels.54 For reports see The Times, London, of 10 September et seq.a Fourteen full delegates: one German (Lassallean), one Frenchman, one Spaniard (an unknown called Gomez), one Schwitzguébel. The remainder all Belgians. General disagreement on all essentials, concealed by the fact that they did not debate, but only narrated and listened. Admittedly, I have only seen one report. The Italians announced what amounted to their resignation; a public International could only harm them, they intended in future only to conspire. The Spaniards are leaning in the same direction. For the rest, they just tell each other lies about the colossal movements they are creating. And they imagine they will still find people who will be taken in.

Mr Bastelica, too, has become a Bonapartist agent. In Stras- bourg, he made approaches of that nature to Avrial, a former member of the Commune, and was, of course, shown the door. One by one, these anarchists all end up in the same way.

Mesa has written to me from Madrid saying that he will have to go to Paris because government persecution is becoming more

[^1]: a The Times, Nos. 28104, 28105, 28107, 28108, 28109; 10, 11, 14, 15, 16 Sep- tember 1874 ('The Seventh International Working Men's Congress').





**[p. 50]**

than he can bear. So we are back in contact with Spain once

more.

In Germany things are going splendidly despite the persecu- tions, in part because of the persecutions. The Lassalleans have become so discredited by their representatives in the Reichstag that the government had to start harassing them just so as to convey the impression that they are a serious movement. That aside, ever since the elections, the Lassalleans have found it necessary to cling to the coat-tails of our people.4 It was a real stroke of luck for Hasselmann and Hasenclever to have been voted into the Reichstag. They are visibly ruining their reputation there: either they will have to join our people or make a mess of things off their own bat. Either course will finish them off.

Mr Jung thought it fitting to write to Liebknecht and make advances to him! Liebknecht sent me the letter and I have shown it to people who will reveal this to Mr Jung.

Marx is in Karlsbad drinking the waters to restore his liver.43 He has had a lot of bad luck. Scarcely had he managed to recover somewhat in July on the Isle of Wight"' when he had to return because his youngest daughter3 suddenly fell seriously ill. No sooner had he arrived than Jenny's little boyb died at the age of about one year. That really hit him hard again. I think that once his liver is all right again the cure may more easily have an effect on his overworked nervous system. All the doctors prophesied that Karlsbad would do him a lot of good. Up to now the Austrian government has left him in peace, and he will probably be leaving at the end of this week.

The squabbles in New York, which made it impossible for you to remain in the General Council any longer, are just as much proof as consequence of the fact that the thing has outlived itself. When circumstances no longer allow a society to act effectively, when the first thing to be done is simply to keep the bond of union tied so that it can be used again when the occasion arises, there are always people to be found who cannot fit themselves into this situation, definitely want to play the BUSYBODY, and demand that 'something be done', and this something can then only be folly. And if these people succeed in getting the majority, they compel everyone who does not want to bear the responsibility for their absurdities to resign. What good fortune that we did not send the minute books over!

[^1]: Eleanor - b Charles, first-born of Jenny Longuet



The French refugees are in utter chaos. They have all fallen out with each other and with everyone else for quite personal reasons, money matters for the most part, and we are now almost entirely rid of them. They all want to live without doing any real work, their heads are full of imagined inventions which would bring in millions if only someone would enable them to exploit their discoveries, a matter of just a few pounds. But anyone who is naive enough to take them at their word will be cheated of his money and denounced as a bourgeois into the bargain. Le Moussu has behaved more disgracefully than anyone and now stands exposed as a charlatan pure and simple.3 All these people have been horribly demoralised by their dissolute life during the war, the Commune and in exile, and the situation really has to be desperate to rescue a Frenchman once he has let himself go. The great mass of politically unknown French workers, on the other hand, has simply abandoned politics for the moment and found work here.

Best regards.

Your

F. Engels 17 September 1874

General Council of the International Working Men's Association

On account with F. Engels

1873 Nov. Received per Serraillier £16— Sept . Telegram to New York £1.16- " 25 copies 'Alliance'c by post 21- £2.10.- 1874 Feb. 12 21- £1-4- - 12 21- £1.4- » 100 Engl. 'Rules'd by post l Vsd. £12.6 » 400 l Vad. £2.10- " 300 Ger. Id. £1.5-£11.1.6

Balance in favour of the General Council £4.18.6

[^1]: Account No. 1 b

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 11-13. - b The account is written on a separate sheet of paper and enclosed with this letter. - c K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - d K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Asso- ciation.



