---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "28. Marx to Engels. 18 September "
Page_Range: "74-76"
---

# 28. Marx to Engels. 18 September 



**[p. 45]**

Account No. 2

1874 August. Printing costs of L'Alliance advanced by F. Engels £32.-.- U p to now have received payment only for the above-mentioned 49 copies for Amer- ica (not reckoning postage) £4.18.- T h e r e remains owing to me £27.2.- (Accounts with Darson and Meissner still : ==

to be settled.)

London, 17 September 1874

First published abridged in Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

28

IN LONDON

Karlsbad, 18 September 1874

You know that I am very lazy when it comes to writing, but on this occasion that was not the cause of my stubborn silence. T h e first three weeks were spent almost without sleep. Together with the exertion here that will make it all clear to you.

Although you drink only in the morning (evenings, before going to bed, we have a cold glass from a special spring brought into the house), the fact is that the whole day you find yourself caught u p in a sort of machine that hardly leaves you a minute.

F. Engels

Printed according to the original

Published in English in full for the first time

[^1]: MARX T O ENGELS 1 6

[^2]: Dear FRED,

[^3]: We shall set off on Monday a; we shall make for H a m b u r g via Leipzig,43 where I shall stop off for a while and see Wilhelm. b

[^4]: a 21 September - b Liebknecht





**[p. 46]**

Up at 5 or half past 5 in the morning. Then 6 glasses from different springs, one after the other. There must be at least a quarter of an hour between each glass.

Then breakfast is prepared, beginning with the purchase of pastry appropriate to the cure. After that, a walk lasting at least one hour. Finally, some of the very excellent coffee available here in one of the coffee houses outside the town. This is followed by a walking tour through the surrounding hills; at ABOUT noon you return home, but have to take a bath every other day, which takes up yet another hour.

There follows a change of toilette; puis" luncheon in a local hotel.

Sleeping after meals is strictly forbidden (it is allowed before meals) and rightly so, as I have become convinced after a single attempt. So, another tour, alternating with an excursion. Return to Karlsbad 6-8 in the evening, a light snack, and — to bed. This programme is varied by visits to the theatre (which always closes at 9, like all other ENTERTAINMENTS), concerts and reading room.

The effect of the waters is to make my head very IRRITABLE. SO you will appreciate how unbearable Kugelmann has become in the long run. He had been so considerate as to give me a room between his and Tussy's so that I enjoyed him, not just when we were together, but also when I was alone. I patiently endured the way he incessantly poured out his solemn, long-winded balderdash in his deep voice. I had greater difficulty in putting up with the gang of Hamburg-Bremen-Hanover philistines, male and female alike, who simply refused to leave me in peace. But my patience came to an end finally when he inflicted his family scenes on me. The fact is that this arch-pedant, this pettifogging, bourgeois philistine has got the idea that his wifeb is unable to understand him, to comprehend his Faustian nature with its aspirations to a higher world outlook, and he torments the woman, who is his superior in every respect, in the most repulsive manner. So it led to a quarrel between us; I moved to a higher floor, completely liberated myself from him (he was having a ruinous effect on my cure) and we only became reconciled once more just before his departure (which took place last Sundayc). However, I declared point-blank that I would not visit him in Hanover.

A man who turned out to be quite an agreeable companion was Simon Deutsch (the same one I had the row with in Paris, and who looked me up without more ado here). In addition half the

[^1]: a then - b Gertrud Kugelmann - c 13 September



