---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "29. Marx to Max Oppenheim. 20 September "
Page_Range: "76-77"
---

# 29. Marx to Max Oppenheim. 20 September 

local medical faculty soon assembled round my daughter3 and me; all very acceptable people for my present purpose when I have to think little and laugh often. Also Knille, the painter from Berlin, a very charming chap.

Shall regale you in London with some amusing details of my adventures with Hans Heiling Kugelmann.

The more one hears of the details about the 'situation in Austria' the more one becomes convinced that this state is coming to the end of the line.

Up to now I have lost about 4 lbs (imperial weight) and even with my hand I can feel that the fat on my liver is in a status evanescens. I believe that I have finally achieved my purpose in Karlsbad, at least for a year. It would give me great pleasure if I could find a few lines from you awaiting me at Meissner's in Hamburg.

With best regards from Tussy and me to Madame Lizzy and Pumps.

Your

Moor

I was invited to go to Ischl (by Dr Kraus, editor of the Wiener Medizinische Zeitung*) and to Prague by Mr Oppenheim (the brother of Mrs Kugelmann and a very agreeable man), but after a certain stage is reached, one longs to be back at home.

29

MARX TO MAX OPPENHEIM

Karlsbad, 20 September 1874

Dear Friend,

My daughter3 and I had been eagerly looking forward to spending a few days with you in Prague and we had made all our

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: IN PRAGUE

[^3]: •> Eleanor - b Allgemeine Wiener medizinische Zeitung



