---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "30. Engels to Marx. 21 September "
Page_Range: "77-80"
---

# 30. Engels to Marx. 21 September 



**[p. 48]**

arrangements yesterday to make our way tomorrow (Monday) to the old Hussite city. Today, however, simultaneously with your kind letter, we received news from Hamburg which makes it imperative for me to choose the direct route via Leipzig in order to settle some business.43

However, all is not lost. I am almost certain to be coming back to Karlsbad next year and will incorporate the visit to Prague in my travel plans from the very start. Your sister'1 will already have written to you how very anxious I am, quite apart from the varied points of interest which Prague itself has to offer, to extend my personal acquaintance with yourself beyond the brief intermezzo here at the spa.

Farewell and rest assured of my feelings of friendship towards you; my travelling companion sends her best regards.

Yours,

Karl Marx

First published in Rheinische Zeitung, Printed according to the original Köln. 21. Februar 1933

Published in English for the first time

30

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 21 September 1874

Dear Moor,

I would have written to you long before, had it not been for the fact that the news from Karlsbad left me in doubt whether a letter would still reach you.

Delighted to hear that Karlsbad has borne fruit. Once your liver is back in working order, it will be possible in due course to calm down your nervous system again after the further stimulation provoked by the cure. You will also have to continue the treatment on your return and should bring instructions with you from

[^1]: IN HAMBURG

[^2]: a Gertrud Kugelmann





**[p. 49]**

Karlsbad about how to proceed. It was absurd of you not to have gone via Dresden; the journey is much prettier and some idle touring would have done you good just now. But there is still time to visit the Holstein coast from Hamburg and you should in any case spend a few days there, it is very attractive. If you are SHORT OF CASH Meissner can give you an advance and we shall pay him back from here.

You will have seen reports of the Brussels congress54 in The Times; they were obviously written by Wingfield, or whatever his name is, who was in The Hague. IT WAS A MISERABLE FAILURE: 14 people, all Belgians apart from 2 German Lassalleans (Frohme from Frankfurt and?a), Schwitzguébel, 1 Spaniard, Gomez, and Eccarius.—Rochat has sent us a highly entertaining account of the nonsense in a small Brussels paper, La Gazetted

Furthermore, the two Scheusc and the restless Frankel were within an ace of destroying the German communist society here.55

Determined to prove that they could act, they arranged a public meeting in their pub and invited the Lassallean robber band of Zilinski

et Co., whom they had such difficulty in ejecting only 2 years previously! I learned of it only when it was too late, gave Frankel a piece of my mind and also gave him instructions about what to do, whereupon, naturally, he did the opposite. WELL, as was to be expected, Zilinski turned up with 50-60 men (while from the society there were barely 10 men!), packed the committee with his own supporters and they HAD IT ALL THEIR OWN WAY. Finally, the meeting was adjourned, and so we were spared the worst, but it is not over yet. Since I have not yet seen Lessner (who must have something on his conscience, otherwise he would have come), I have not yet had a reliable report on what transpired. Frankel is very peeved about his act of heroism and your wife has given him a good scolding. The Scheus appear to be IRREPRESSIBLE MEDDLERS.

In Leipzig you will perhaps have a chance to see Bios who is being released tomorrow or the day after. At any rate, you will have heard that the Cologne workers want to publish a daily paper and Bios has approached me to find out whether they could call it Neue Rheinische Zeitung—Bios is to be the editor. Since it was not possible to confer with you—at the start of your stay in Karlsbad and before any news had arrived from you—I had to make a provisional decision. CONSIDERING that this is the first time that these people have approached us IN A BECOMING MANNER, 2. that it is unlikely that we shall ever publish a Neue Rheinische Zeitung again

[^1]: a Paul Kersten - b La Gazette de Bruxelles - c Heinrich and Andreas





**[p. 50]**

ourselves, if only because of the provincial nature of Cologne, J had no objection quant à moi,3 and I also hazarded the opinion that you too would agree to it. Jenny,b whom I consulted as your representative, was also of this opinion. It would have made a very shabby impression on the Rhineland workers if we had refused. However, if you have any objections there is still time to reverse the matter.56

The Volksstaat under Wilhelm' is becoming worse and even more boring thanks to the tendency to accept materials uncritically just to fill up space. Only here and there is there anything readable.

I am deeply immersed in the doctrine of essence. Back from Jersey, I found Tyndall's and Huxley's speeches in Belfast57

waiting for me, which once again reveal the plight of these people, and the way they are stuck fast in the thing-in-itself and their cry of anguish for a philosophy to rescue them. This brought me back again, after all manner of interruptions on the first week, to the theme of dialectics. In view of the feeble mind of the natural scientists, the great Logic6 can only be used sparingly, although as far as dialectics are concerned, it goes much more nearly to the heart of the matter. But the account of it in the Encyclopaedia,,e on the other hand, could have been tailor-made for these people, the illustrations are taken largely from their own subject and are strik- ing, and at the same time, because of the more popular presenta- tion, they are freer of idealism. Now, since I neither can nor will exempt these gentlemen from the punishment of having to learn from Hegel, it is clear that there is a veritable treasure-trove here, all the more so since even today the old fellow can give them a number of tough nuts to crack. Tyndall's inaugural lecture, incidentally, is the boldest speech to have been delivered in England to such an audience, and has created a tremendous impression and panic. It is evident that Haeckel's much more incisive manner of speaking has not let him rest. I have the verbatim report in Nature, which you can read here. His acknowledgement to Epicurus will amuse you. So much is certain: the return to a genuinely reflective view of nature is making much more serious progress here in England than in Germany, and people here seek salvation at least in Epicurus, Descartes, Hume and Kant, rather than in Schopenhauer and Hartmann. The

[^1]: a for my part - b Jenny Longuet - c Wilhelm Liebknecht - d G. W. F. Hegel, Wis- senschaft der Logik. - e G. W. F. Hegel, Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse, Part 1: Die Logik.



