---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "31. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15 October "
Page_Range: "80-81"
---

# 31. Engels to Laura Lafargue. 15 October 



**[p. 51]**

French thinkers of the eighteenth century, of course, are still taboo.

In New York, the rowdies and braggarts have obtained a majority in the General Council, and Sorge has abdicated1' and completely retired. All the better. It means that we have absolutely no responsibility for the nonsense any more and it will soon die a natural death. How fortunate that we have records of the proceedings!

Quant à la grande politique,h we can fortunately LET IT TAKE CARE OF ITSELF; there will be time enough to laugh about it all when you return.

Otherwise everything here is ALL RIGHT, Jenny looked very well the day before yesterday and was in high spirits. Wroblewski is better and has used the electricity. There was never any question of amputating his arm, only of cutting out a piece of muscle in which, in all probability, a nerve end had become lodged, thus causing the pain. But he must have felt terrible and our money came in the nick of time.

Regards to Meissner from me; I shall be writing to him myself about various matters.

Warmest regards to Tussy, à revoir.

Your

F. E.

31

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

[London,] 15 October 1874 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W. My dear Laura,

If I sent you only one of the three articlesc it was, firstly, because I thought you would have had the two previous ones from

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . Stutteart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 41. - b As for high politics - c F. Engels, Refugee Literature.

[^4]: 6-406



