---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "32. Marx to Max Oppenheim. 17 October "
Page_Range: "81-82"
---

# 32. Marx to Max Oppenheim. 17 October 



**[p. 52]**

your Mama and, secondly, because of No. 1 I had given the few extra copies I had to the Poles for propaganda, and because of No. 2 I had no extra copies at all. I send you now my copy of No. 1 which I shall thank you to return at your convenience; as to No. 2 I have lent it to a friend and as usual not received it back, so that I must get it first before I can send it to you.

Of the Bauernkrieg* I expect to be able to send you, in a few weeks, a new edition with a few words added to the introduction,b

but otherwise unaltered; as usual, the notice given me was too short.

With kindest regards to Lafargue.

I remain

very affectionately yours,

F. Engels

Mrs Engelsc sends her kindest regards to you both.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

32

MARX TO MAX OPPENHEIM

London, 17 October 1874

1 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mr Oppenheim,

A few days ago I posted off one Capital and one 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte for you and one copy of each of these books for Dr Gans jun. Would you be so kind as to send his copies on to him; he lives in Rosengasse, No. 17, 1st floor, Prague.

When I took my departure from Karlsbad, I did so with the intention of proceeding directly to Hamburg in order to settle my business with the booksellerd there and then to return to London

[^1]: IN PRAGUE

[^2]: a Peasant War - b F. Engels, 'Supplement to the Preface of 1870 for The Peasant War in Germany'. - c Lizzie Burns - d Otto Meissner



