---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "33. Engels to Hermann Lopatin. About 20 October "
Page_Range: "82-83"
---

# 33. Engels to Hermann Lopatin. About 20 October 



**[p. 53]**

as soon as possible to resume my work. I soon discovered, however, that the after-treatment following the strict regime of Karlsbad is not to be taken lightly and so had to spend almost another two weeks romping around Dresden, Leipzig, Berlin and Hamburg. 4 3 Had I foreseen this—and my daughter" and I both regret our mistake—I would have first come to see you in Prague.

Mais l'homme propose et le chemin de fer dispose!1

I hope that your health has improved and that your business may one day soon bring you in this direction.

My daughter sends you her best regards.

Yours very sincerely,

K. Marx

First published in Rheinische Zeitung, Printed according to the original Köln, 21. Februar 1933

Published in English for the first time

33

IN PARIS

[London, about 20 October 1874]

First published, in English and in Rus- Reproduced from Lopatin's copy sian, in Istoriya SSSR, No. 6, Moscow, 1959

[^1]: ENGELS T O H E R M A N N L O P A T I N 5 8

[^2]: But such was not at all my intention. O n the contrary, I toned down as much as I possibly could, because after perusing the pamphlet: Pycc Koü cou.iwi'b HO-peeojiwulio HHOü Monodejicuf I really could no longer bear any grudge to our friend for the uncommonly severe and really unjustifiable expressions he had used towards us. As far as I am concerned nous sommes quittes? and I am ready to shake his hand any time if he takes the thing as easy as I do.

[^3]: a Eleanor - b But man proposes and the railway disposes. - c [P. L. Lavrov,] Pycc Koù

[^4]: co Viianb HO-peeojiwitiou Hou MOJiodexu. Ylo noeody öpomiopvi: '3adauu peeo AWi^io HHOü nponaaandu 86 Pocciu'. - d Pyotr Lavrov - ' we are quits

[^5]: 6*



