---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "37. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 30 January "
Page_Range: "85-86"
---

# 37. Marx to Maurice Lachâtre. 30 January 

(French) of the as yet unpublished livraisons* of Capital.17 As soon as the whole thing comes out I shall send it to you, for I have altered a lot and added a lot, especially in the final sections of the French edition.

Your consignment of pheasants and livers arrived in good time and met with a genuinely enthusiastic reception here.

I am not familiar with the Berlin paperb about which you wrote to me; however one of my disciples here may be contributing to it, unbeknown to me.61

I now have another request to make of you. The doctors have forbidden me to smoke without a cigar-holder. I should therefore like 200 holders for myself and my friends here; they came to my notice in Karlsbad, can be thrown away after every cigar if they no longer seem usable, and are not to be had over here. But bear in mind that this is a commercial commission, the costs of which you must acquaint me with if you carry it out, for otherwise I should feel embarrassed about approaching you in a similar predicament.

My daughterc sends you her kindest regards. She corresponds with Mrs Kugelmann and daughter from whom she has recently had letters.

When you next write, would you be so good as to tell me something more about the state of business in Bohemia?

I much look forward to the time when I shall see you here.

Yours very cordially,

Karl Marx

37

MARX TO MAURICE LACHÂTRE

London, 30 January 1875 Dear Citizen,

save only for the afterword, the table of contents and the errata,

[^1]: First published in Rheinische Zeitung, Printed according to the original Köln, 21. Februar 1933

[^2]: IN BRUSSELS

[^3]: I have today sent off to Paris the last part of the manuscript,d

[^4]: a instalments - b The International Gazette - c Eleanoi Marx - d of the French translation of the first volume of Capital



