---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "39. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 11 February "
Page_Range: "87-88"
---

# 39. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 11 February 



**[p. 39]**

MARX T O PYOTR LAVROV65

IN LONDON

[London,] 11 February 1875

My dear Friend,

I am sending you today the German edition3 in one volume (I no longer have any available Hefteh), and the first six fascicles of the French edition.17 The latter contains many changes and additions (see e.g. fascicle 6, p. 222 attacking John Stuart Mill—a striking example of how bourgeois economists, even with the best of intentions, instinctively go off the rails at the very moment when they seem about to light on the truth0). The most important changes contained in the French edition, however, are to be found in those parts not yet published, namely the chapters on accumulation.

Many thanks for the publications you sent me. What particularly interested me were the articles 'MTO 4e Aae TCH Ha po AHHe?'.66 If I had the time I would make excerpts for the Volksstaat. The 'He Haui H'd are first-rate people. I rather suspect that our friend Lopatin had a hand in the said article.67

A large parcel of books and official publications was despatched to me from St Petersburg but was stolen, probably by the Russian government. Amongst other things it contained the reports, KOMUCCIR no cejitc KOMy xo3RÜcmey u cejitc Koü npou3eobumem Mocmu es Pocciu and IJo nodani HOMy eonpocyf things that were absolutely essential to the chapter in the second volume in which I deal with landownership, etc., in Russia.68

My health has greatly improved since my stay at Karlsbad43 but, for one thing, I am still compelled to greatly restrict my hours of

[^1]: a the second German edition of the first volume of Capital - b instalments - c See Capital, Vol. I, Part V, Ch. XVI (present edition, Vol. 35). - d Not Ours - e /fo Kjiadz, ewcouauute ynpejtcde UHOU KOMMUCCIU djin lucjibdoea Hin Hvmtut Hneo no Jioj Keuin cejïbcxaeo xos RÜcmea u ca*>CK0Ü npou3eodumem>Hocmu «s Pocciu; Tpydu KOMMucciu, ebicouaüwe yupejicde HHOü dim nepec Mompa cucme MVi nodameü u c6opoet>, Vol. XXII: 'CBO/TB

[^2]: OT3WBOBT, ry6ep HCKHXT> 3e MCKHXT> Co6pa Hifi, 3e MCKHX-b ynpa BTb H OCOÖHXT, 3e MCKHXT> KOMMHCcifl, no npoe KTy npeo6pa30Ba Hia no^yui HOH CHCTCMM c6opo BT>, coc Ta BAe H- HOMy BT> MHHHcrepc TB'fe <{>HHa HCOBT>', Parts I-III.



