---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "41. Engels to Hermann Ramm. 18 March "
Page_Range: "88-89"
---

# 41. Engels to Hermann Ramm. 18 March 



**[p. 59]**

work and, for another, I was no sooner back in London than I caught a COLD which has not ceased to plague me ever since. I shall come and see you when the weather turns finer.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, jg28 Translated from the French

40 MARX TO ENGELS69

IN LONDON

[London, February-March 1875]

Go to it, but in jovial fashion. So stupid, that Bakunin may have contributed. What Peter Tkachov is above all trying to tell his readers is that you had treated him as an enemy, and he therefore invents all manner of disputes that never occurred.

[London, 18 March 1875] Answered 18/3. Possibly 1,000 talers from me, but dependent on circumstances over which I have no control. Shall revert to this as soon as possible.2

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 18 (Note 444), Moscow, 1961

[^2]: 41 ENGELS TO HERMANN RAMM70

[^3]: IN LEIPZIG

[^4]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a The text crossed out before this note reads: 'Answered 16/3/75. Have offered, as soon as I can make them available, 1,000 talers on the same terms as the other contributors but definite decision postponed until after the Congress,71 so that I shall be entirely uncommitted should it produce a predominantly Lassallean programme and authorities.'



