---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "47. Marx to Jenny Marx. 10 May : "
Page_Range: "104-105"
---

# 47. Marx to Jenny Marx. 10 May : 



**[p. 47]**

MARX TO JENNY MARX

IN SHANKLIN

[London,] 10 May 1875

Dear Jenny,

We have all been greatly concerned about your indisposition, but after the CASTOR-OIL and now that the weather is fine, I hope it has passed.

Engels' suggestion that I accompany him to Shanklin suited me quite well in that I thought it expedient to stay there, if only for your sake; but I would not have wished him to delay on my account or, on the other hand, to restrict my freedom of movement, thereby inconveniencing both me and himself. I am awaiting the final PROOF-SHEETS from Paris, you see, and would have no peace of mind if, because of my absence, the unspeakably protracted publication of the final instalments17 were to be still further protracted. This time I have received two letters in succession from Lachâtre who is presently staying in Vevey (Switzerland). The fool expresses his utmost satisfaction with the

dernières livraisons* these being,he says, generally comprehensible, i.e. even to him. Of course, I shall not reply to this stuff, any more than to his disgruntled letter from Brussels.

I have sent off the circular (now already in Bracke's possession) on Liebknecht-Hasselmann's concoction; it's a little pamphlet ; also given the required information to Mr Schramm in Berlin ; finally, made Willebrord unhappy by STRICTLY refusing to collabo- rate in any way on a journal12 under the editorship of Messieurs de 'L'Indépendance'.^ I'm sorry for Willebrord's sake, but really, what a nonsensical request.93

Here at home everything goes on as usual. It seems to me that the finer weather is doing Jennychen good. To her great satisfaction MOTHER Lormier has subjected Longuet to a merciless criticism of his 'French' furniture RUBBISH. Lafargue's business appears to be getting on all right.94

I'm minding the house today, since Lenchen and Tussy have gone into town where they are to meet Jennychen at a furniture auction.

[^1]: a last instalments - b See this volume, p. 73. - c L'Indépendance belge



