---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "52. Marx to Matilda Betham- Edwards. 14 July "
Page_Range: "108-111"
---

# 52. Marx to Matilda Betham- Edwards. 14 July 



**[p. 51]**

MARX TO JUSTE VERNOUILLET99

IN PARIS

[London,] 12 July 1875 Dear Citizen,

You have done me a great service in telling me all about the affair. I shall at once write to M. Lahure, asking him to let me have an unequivocal reply.100

In the meantime, perhaps you would be so kind as to send me the name and address of that managerial Cerberus,a as also the address of a lawyer to whom I might have recourse should need arise.

If the French government wants a rumpus, I have sufficient contacts with the European press to do it signal service in that respect.

Yours very sincerely,

K. Marxb

52

MARX TO MATILDA BETHAM-EDWARDS

[London,] 14 July 1875 41 Maitland Park Crescent, N. W. Sir,c

there occur matter-of-facts errors to some of which I shall call

[^1]: First published (facsimile) in Renmin Printed according to the facsimile Ribao, Beijing, 9 March 1983 and in the language of the original (French) in Translated from the French Schriften aus dem Karl-Marx-Haus Arbeiter- P u b l i s h e d i n E n g l i s h f o r t h e f i r s t bewegung und Geschiente, Nr. 29, Trier, 1983 time

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: In your article 'The International Working Men's Association'd

[^4]: a Adolphe Quest - b There follows an undecipherable postscript. - l When Marx wrote this letter, he probably did not know that the author of the article, 'The International Working Men's Association', was a woman. - d The article was published anonymously in Fraser's Magazine, Nos. LXVII-LXIX, July to September

[^5]: 1875.



your attention. But before doing so, allow me to express my astonishment at your statement:

'We believe that an abbreviated translation of this work' (Das Kapital) 'is to be brought out shortly.'

I have reserved the right of translation and there exists a copyright treaty between Germany and England.101 I shall, therefore, certainly stop the circulation of any such epitome, not beforehand authorised by me. Abbreviation affords the traduttore3

peculiar facilities to turn traditore}' Even the revision of the not-abbreviated French translation, published in livraisons0 at Paris, has given me more trouble than the re-writing the whole book in French would have done.17

Supposing that you know the translator, and being anxious to avoid the nuisance of law-proceedings, I have taken the liberty to write to you upon this subject.

With regard to the matter-of-fact errors occurring in your article, I shall limit myself to a few items.

You say:

'Das Kapital came out soon after Proudhon's essays on the Fallacies of Political Economy, and in a little chapter called the Miseries of Philosophy Marx answered Proudhon's chapter on the Philosophy of Misery', etc.

It was Proudhon's voluminous work: Systeme des Contradictions Economiques ou Philosophie de la Misère, to which I replied by the brochure, written in French, Misère de la Philosophie? The latter was published in 1847, but Das Kapital only twenty years later, in 1867. I suppose that you have been led into error by Fribourg's most untrustworthy publication on the 'International'.6

Not being aware that, when giving in full the preamble of the Rules, and parts of the Inaugural Address of the International, you were actually quoting writings from my pen, you reprint from an address, nameless and dateless, a proposition which, you say, 'must have come from the pen of Dr Marx himself. Unfortunately, they did not. I never saw that address before I read it in the columns of Fraser.g It has evidently been indited by one of my adherents, but, at the same time, contains some loose phraseology I was not delighted to have fathered upon me.

[^1]: a translator - b traitor - c instalments - d See present edition, Vol. 6. - e E. E. Fri- bourg, L'Association Internationale des Travailleurs. - f K. Marx,'Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association' and 'Provisional Rules of the Association'. - s Fraser's Magazine





**[p. 81]**

Mazzini and Blanqui had never any 'correspondence' whatever with the General Council of the International. When the Interna- tional was founded, some Italian workmen, partisans of Mazzini, and one Major Wolff (whom papers, detected at the time of the Paris Commune, have proved to have been a police spy, in the regular pay of the Bonapartist préfet de police), his agent, became members of the General Council. Wolff proposed an Inaugural Address and Rules which, it was known, had been written by Mazzini. Both documents being rejected, and those drawn up by me being accepted, Mazzini, soon after, induced his partisans to secede from the General Council, and remained, from that time to his death, the most irreconcilable enemy of the International.

Orsinia (the brother of the Italian patriot) was never present at the sittings of the General Council and never gave it any account, interesting or otherwise, of any subject whatever. He had some private correspondence with me, relating to his doings in the U. States.

Potter was never a member of the 'International', Hales was not present at the Basle Congress,102 etc.

I have the honour, Sir,

To be yours most respectfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in Sotheby and Reproduced from the facsimile Co. Catalogue of Valuable Printed Books, Autograph Letters, Historical Documents, etc., London, 1952, and in full, in Chinese, in Marx/Engels, Collected Works, Renmin Publishers, Beijing, 1972, and in the language of the original (Eng- lish, facsimile) in Renmin Ribao, Beijing, 9 March 1983

[^2]: a Cesare Orsini



