---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "56. Marx to Engels. 8 September "
Page_Range: "116-118"
---

# 56. Marx to Engels. 8 September 



**[p. 55]**

MARX TO MAX OPPENHEIM

IN PRAGUE

Karlsbad, 6 September 1875 Germania

Dear Friend,

Having had no reply to the letter I sent you last week, I conclude that you are not in Prague. On that assumption, I shall not return home via Prague on Saturday (11th September) but direct via Frankfurt.

Au revoir,

Your most sincere friend,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

56

Karlsbad, 8 September 1875 Germania

Dear FRED,

You will doubtless have already heard from Tussy that my first letter to her, which I handed in personally at the main post office here on 18 August in the presence of Dr Gans junior, has been intercepted, doubtless by the Prussian postal authorities. The subsequent ones have arrived; the latest, which I sent her last week, appears to have shared the fate of the first, for I should otherwise surely have had an answer from her.112

This time I'm really getting on splendidly with the cure; with rare exceptions good nights, too. But I am also, or so my

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS16

[^2]: IN RAMSGATE



numerous doctor friends say, Karlsbad's model guest. From time to time these gentlemen have been at pains to lead me away from the path of 'salvation'3 on the pretext 'praesente medico',b etc., but their attempts have failed.

As a second-year patient I have been promoted in the hierarchy of the springs. Last year my sources of supply were Theresien- brunn (41° R), Marktbrunn (39°) and Mühlbrunn (43.6°), while I only took a glass of Sprudel twice. This year, from the second week on, they have been Felsenquelle (one glass a day) (45° R), Bernardsbrunn (53.8°) (two glasses) and Sprudel (two glasses) 59°-60° R, making five glasses of hot every morning, on top of which come one cold Schlossbrunn on rising and one at bedtime.

According to Prof. Ferdinand Ragsky's analysis, Sprudel water consists of:

In 16 ounces=7680 g.

Sulphate of potash 1.2564 Sulphate of soda 18.2160 Chloride of sodium 7.9156 Carbonate of soda 10.4593 Carbonate of lime 2.2870 Carbonate of magnesia 0.9523 Carbonate of strontium 0.0061 Carbonate of ferric oxide 0.0215 Carbonate of manganic oxide 0.0046 Phosphate of clay 0.0030 Phosphate of lime 0.0015 Fluoride of potassium 0.0276 Silica 0.5590 Total of fixed constituents 41.7099 Free and uncombined carbonic acid 5.8670

here was a businessman from Barmen, Gustav Köttgen—might he be connected with the old fool114?

You had better watch out: Karl Grün is competing with you. He is bringing out a work on natural philosophy next spring and has already given a foretaste of it in the Berlin Wage which Weiss has sent me from Berlin.115

[^1]: Among the fellows calling for the celebration of Sedan Day113

[^2]: 3 'Heil' in the original, meaning 'salvation' and 'treatment'. - b Here: that doctors were in attendance.



