---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "58. Marx to Hermann Schumacher. 21 September "
Page_Range: "119-120"
---

# 58. Marx to Hermann Schumacher. 21 September 



**[p. 58]**

MARX TO HERMANN SCHUMACHER

IN ZARCHLIN

London, 21 September 1875 41 Maitland Park Crescent, N. W.

Esteemed Sir,

Your letter of 27 June reached me in good time, but the book'1

did not arrive until much later, after I had already left London to take the cure at Karlsbad.104 Hence the delay in replying. I didn't get back until yesterday.

While tendering my best thanks for your letter and the first part of Thünen, I shall be presumptuous enough to ask for the biography of Thünen you also offered- me.b If you do not possess the second edition of Capital' I shall send it to you with the greatest pleasure.

I have always regarded Thünen as something of an exception among German economists, since it is exceedingly rare for an objective, independent inquirer to be found in their midst.

I would endorse your preface in its entirety if our attitudes in regard to 'wages' did not differ materially. Thünen and you yourself regard wages as the immediate expression of a genuine economic relation; I regard them as a spurious form concealing a content materially different from the expression of that form.

I am, Sir,

Yours faithfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a J. H. Thünen, Der isolirte Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirthschaft und Nationalökonomie, 3rd ed., Part I, Berlin, 1875 (with Preface by the publisher H. Schumacher). - b [H. Schumacher,] Johann Heinrich von Thünen. Ein Forscherle- ben. - c the first volume of Capital in German



