---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "59. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 24 September "
Page_Range: "120-121"
---

# 59. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 24 September 



**[p. 59]**

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN LONDON

[London,] 24 September 1875 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Mr Lavrov,

On my return from Ramsgate where I had spent a few weeks,103

I found your letter of the 20th, along with a pile of newspapers, books, etc. which had arrived during my absence. To start with I shall try to get all this into some kind of order and, as soon as possible, turn to reading your article in Brieped^!*—so as to be able to tell you where we agree and where we differ in our views on the relationship of socialism to the struggle for existence as propounded by Darwin.b If this does not reach you within a day or two, you must excuse me on the grounds of the many letters I have to write and the backlog of work that remains to be tackled, since for the past month I have only been able to do those things which absolutely had to be done without delay.

I do not know the pamphlet of which you speak116; if you could let me have it by post for a day or two, I should be much obliged.

We once more have a Portuguese paper, O Protesto (The Protest) of Lisbon, of which six (weekly) issues have appeared— editorial department, Rua do Bemformoso 110, second floor, management, Rua dos Cardaes de Jesus (!) 69, second floor. I still have not looked through the four issues we have received.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: Would you kindly remember me to Mr and Mrs Smirnov.c

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad,

[^3]: jogg Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a [P. L. Lavrov,] 'Couia AH3MT> H 6opb6a 3a cymecx BOBa Hie', Bneped-b!, No. 17, 15 (3) September 1875. - b See this volume, pp. 106-09. - c Valerian Smirnov and his wife Rozalia Idelson



