---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "60. Marx to Peter Imandt. 27 September "
Page_Range: "121-122"
---

# 60. Marx to Peter Imandt. 27 September 



**[p. 60]**

MARX TO PETER IMANDT

IN DUNDEE

London, 27 September 1875 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. Dear Imandt,

I was very glad to hear from you again at last. I have only just arrived back from taking the cure at Karlsbad.104 It has done me a great deal of good and is also the reason why I didn't know about the article that was sent to me.117 I imagine it originates from Barry, a very fanatical Scottish party member. The article in Fraser's (to which Eccarius, Hales, Mottershead, Jung contributed their share—chaps now in very low water) stems from a deplorable novelist, Mrs Betham- Edwards3 who relates, e.g., that my anti-Proudhon pieceb is a short chapter in Capital.

Printing of the French edition of the latter (the last three FASCICLES in particular heavily revised by me) has been constantly disrupted by the French government. The last three instalments, which were set more than six months ago, are finally to be allowed to leave the press. I shall send them to you on receipt of the same.

Kaub and Dr C. Hirsch, who have come over from Paris for a few days, tell me that things are going ill with our old friend Schily (he is still living at 4 rue St Quentin); to begin with, there had been trouble for years between him and his better half, health ruined, lost most of his German clients through their having to leave Paris after the catastrophe,' has grown morose, francophobe and somewhat conservative. He could probably do well for himself in Strasbourg, but is rightly too proud to petition the Prussians.

The whole family send their warmest regards. Drop us a line again soon.

Salut.

Your

K. M. First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^1]: In Germany I found much disenchantment, even among the philistines, following the sorry outcome of the milliards windfall.118

[^2]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a See this volume, pp. 79-81. - b K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. - c i.e. of the Franco-Prussian War that began in 1870



