---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "63. Engels to Wilhelm Bracke. 11 October "
Page_Range: "123-126"
---

# 63. Engels to Wilhelm Bracke. 11 October 



**[p. 94]**

before returning it. This puerile scriptum does not warrant an answer.

Yours sincerely,

K. M.

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, ig2g Published in English for the first time

63

ENGELS TO WILHELM BRACKE72

IN BRUNSWICK

London, 11 October 1875

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.a

Dear Bracke,

I have put off answering your last letters, the most recent dated 28 June, firstly because Marx and I have been apart for six weeks—he at Karlsbad 104 and I at the seaside,103 where I didn't see the Volksstaat—and next, because I wanted to wait and see how the new coalition and the combined committee 120 got on in practice.

We entirely share your view that Liebknecht, in his anxiety to achieve unity and pay any price for it, has made a complete mess of everything. Even if they deemed this necessary, there was no need to say or indicate as much to the other contracting party. Thereafter the vindication of one mistake has inevitably entailed another. The Unity Congress,89 once established on an unsound basis and blazoned abroad, could on no account be allowed to fail, and thus they again had to give way on essential issues. You are perfectly right: this unification bears within it the seeds of dissension, and I shall be happy if, when the split does come, the only ones to go are the incurable fanatics, and not, with them, the whole of the otherwise sound rank and file who could, if given a

[^1]: a This line is written by an unknown person.





**[p. 95]**

good training, be licked into shape. That will depend on the time when, and the circumstances under which, the inevitable happens. The programme in its final version 121 consists of 3 parts: 1. Lassallean dicta and slogans which ought in no circumstances to be adopted. When two factions are agreed, they should include in the programme what is agreed, not what is contested. By permitting this regardless, our people voluntarily passed under the Caudine yoke122;

2. a series of vulgar democratic demands, drawn up in the spirit and style of the People's Party 6;

3. a number of would-be communist propositions, for the most part borrowed from the Manifesto," but so reworded that, looked at in the light of day, every one without exception contains hair-raising balderdash. If they don't understand these things, they should either leave them alone or else copy them word for word from those who are generally admitted to know what they are talking about.

Luckily the programme fared better than it deserved. Working men, bourgeois and petty bourgeois alike read into it what it ought, in fact, to contain but doesn't contain, and it occurred to no one, of whatever complexion, to submit one of these wondrous propositions to public scrutiny in order to discover its real import. That's what has made it possible for us to say nothing about this programme. A further consideration is that one cannot translate these propositions into any foreign language without being forced either to write down stuff that is palpably idiotic or else place a communist construction on them, the latter having already been done by friend and foe alike. I myself have had to do so when making a translation for our Spanish friends.123

What I have seen of the committee's activities has not so far been gratifying. Firstly, their proceedings against your book and that of B. Becker; it wasn't the committee's fault if they didn't succeed.124 Secondly, Sonnemann, whom Marx saw when in transit, said that he had offered Vahlteich the post of correspon- dent to the Frankfurter Zeitung but that the committee had forbidden Vahlteich to acceptb! That's worse than censorship, and how Vahlteich could possibly submit to anything of the kind is beyond my comprehension. And then, what ineptitude! Rather they should have ensured that, everywhere in Germany, it was our people who worked for the Frankfurter] Finally, the methods

[^1]: K.. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party. - b See this volume, p. 85.



adopted by the Lassallean members at the founding of the Berlin co-operative printing office would seem to me not altogether above-board; after our people had confidingly appointed the committee as supervisory board of the Leipzig printing office, those in Berlin had first to be coerced into doing so.125 But I am not very well acquainted with the details in this instance.

However, it's a good thing that the committee is comparatively inactive and, as C. Hirsch says, who was over here recently, confines itself to the humdrum existence of a news and information agency. Any vigorous intervention on its part would only precipitate the crisis, something its members would appear to sense.

And what weakness, assenting to a committee of three Lassal- leans and two of our chaps! U1

All in all, it looks as though they'll get away with a black eye, if a mighty one. Let us hope that that will be all and that meanwhile propaganda will have its effect upon the Lassalleans. If things hold out until the next Reichstag elections,126 all may be well. But then Stieber and Tessendorf will do their damnedest and then, too, the time will come when our folk will see for the first time what exactly they have taken on in the persons of Hasselmann and Hasenclever.

Marx has returned from Karlsbad a completely different man, strong, invigorated, cheerful and healthy, and will soon be able to get down seriously to work again. He and I send our cordial regards. Write again every now and then and let us know how things are going. The Leipzigers2 have all of them too deep interests of their own to be frank and open with us, and at this particular juncture the party would not dream of washing its dirty linen in public.

Most sincerely yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published abridged in: F. Engels, Politisches Vermächtnis. Aus unveröffentlich- ten Briefen, Berlin, 1920 and in full in Die Gesellschaft, Jg. 4, Bd. II, Nr. 8, Berlin,

[^2]: 1927

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: a above all Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel



