---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "64. Engels to August Bebel. 12 October "
Page_Range: "126-128"
---

# 64. Engels to August Bebel. 12 October 



**[p. 64]**

ENGELS T O AUGUST BEBEL72

IN LEIPZIG

London, 12 October 1875 Dear Bebel,

Your letter" wholly corroborates our view that for us unifica- tion71 is premature and bears within it the seeds of future dissension. Should it prove possible to stave off such dissension until after the next Reichstag elections126—well and good

The programme, as it now stands,121 consists of three parts:

1. of Lassallean propositions and slogans whose adoption is a lasting stigma on our party. When two factions agree upon a common programme, they should include in it what is agreed, and not touch on anything where they disagree. True, Lassallean state aid figures in the Eisenach programme, but as one of many transitional measures and, from all I have heard, it would almost certainly have been thrown out on Bracke's motion at this year's Congress81 had there been no unification. Now it figures as a unique and infallible panacea for all social ills. To have let the 'iron law of wages' and other Lassallean dicta be imposed upon it was for our party a tremendous moral defeat. It became converted to the Lassallean creed. That is something which brooks no denial. This part of the programme is the Caudine yoke122 beneath which our party has crawled for the greater glory of Saint Lassalle;

2. of democratic demands, drawn up in the very spirit and style of the People's Party76;

3. of demands on the 'present-day state' (there is no knowing to whom, if anyone, the other 'demands' are addressed), which are very muddled and illogical;

4. of general propositions, for the most part borrowed from the Communist Manifesto and the Rules of the International,13 but so reworded that what they convey is either totally wrong or pure balderdash, as Marx has made abundantly clear in the essay known to you.c

The whole thing is excessively disjointed, muddled, inconse- quential, illogical and discreditable. Had the bourgeois press

[^1]: a See A. Bebel, Aus meinem Leben, Part II, Stuttgart, 1911, pp. 334-36. - b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party; K. Marx, General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association. - c K. Marx, Critique of the Cotha Programme.





**[p. 98]**

possessed a single critical mind, he would have gone through this programme proposition by proposition, examined each proposi- tion for its true content, shown it quite clearly to be nonsensical and enlarged on the contradictions and economic howlers (when it says, for instance, that the means of labour are today 'a monopoly of the capitalist class', as though there were no landowners, or talks of 'freeing labour' instead of the working class, the trouble nowadays being that labour as such is far too free!), thus exposing our whole party to the most dreadful ridicule. Instead of that the jackasses on the bourgeois papers have taken this programme perfectly seriously, reading into it what isn't there and interpreting it comrnunistically. The workers are apparently doing the same. It is this circumstance alone which has made it possible for Marx and myself not to disassociate ourselves publicly from a programme such as this. So long as our opponents as well as the workers continue to read our views into that programme, we are justified in saying nothing about it.

If you are satisfied with the outcome in the matter of personnel, then our side must have lowered its sights considerably. Two of our men and three Lassalleans! i n So here again our people are not equal allies but losers, and outvoted from the start. Nor, from what we know of it, is the committee's3 activity edifying: 1. Resolution not to place the two books about Lassalleanism by Bracke and B. Becker on the party's list; if this was withdrawn, the fault did not lie with the committee or Liebknecht124; 2. Ban on Vahlteich's acceptance of the post of correspondent to the Frankfurter Zeitung offered by Sonnemann, who himself told Marx this when he was in transit there.b What surprises me even more than the arrogance of the committee and the readiness with which Vahlteich knuckled under instead of giving the committee a piece of his mind, is the colossal stupidity of the said resolution. Rather, the committee should have ensured that a paper like the Frankfurter be served exclusively by our people in all districts.

You are perfectly right when you say that the whole thing is an educational experiment which promises the most favourable results even with circumstances as they are. The unification as such may be considered a great success if it holds out for two years. But it was undoubtedly to be had at a far cheaper price.

[^1]: First published in: A. Bebel, Aus meinem Printed according to the book Leben, Teil II, Stuttgart, 1911

[^2]: a the Executive Committee of the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany - b See this volume, p. 85.



