---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "65. Engels to August Bebel. 15 October "
Page_Range: "128-132"
---

# 65. Engels to August Bebel. 15 October 



**[p. 65]**

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL127

IN LEIPZIG

but all I can see is that the legal status of the company must have changed considerably.128 I'd like some elucidation on this point, and also as to what guarantees there are to prevent the Lassallean majority on the administrative board from taking over the whole printing office in the event of the split.129

From the fact of the [press's] removal, I gather indirectly that the plan to purchase a house for the purpose3 has been abandoned or become unnecessary. That is undoubtedly a very good thing, for only in a case of the utmost necessity would a poor party like ours be justified in tying up money in property. First because it could be better used as working capital, and second because, in view of the total unpredictability of the law in Germany where political matters are concerned, one can never tell what might become of the property if, at any time, acute reaction should set in.

We again have a paper in Portugal, O Protesto—Protest. The movement there is forging ahead, despite much obstruction on the part of the government and the bourgeoisie.

Marx has complained bitterly about the incomprehensible comment in No. 104 on the passage in his 'Anti-Proudhon'— about the condemnation of coalitions by socialists and economists alike—namely that these were 'socialists of the Proudhonian stamp'.130 In the first place, there was at that time not a single socialist of the Proudhonian stamp unless it were Proudhon himself. Secondly, Marx's assertion applied to all socialists who had hitherto entered the arena (except for us two, who were not known in France), in so far as they had occasion to concern themselves with coalitions—first and foremost Robert Owen. The same applies to the Owenites and, among the French, to Cabet inter alia. There being no right of coalition in France, this question was hardly touched on in that country. But since the only kind of socialism that existed before Marx was feudal, bourgeois, petty- bourgeois or Utopian, or a combination of various of these elements, it was clear that all these socialists, all of whom claimed to possess a definite universal panacea of their own, and were completely outside the real workers' movement, regarded every manifestation of the real movement—and that includes coalitions

[^1]: •' See this volume, p. 59.

[^2]: 9-400





**[p. 100]**

and strikes—as a wrong turning that would deflect the masses from the one redeeming path of the true faith. Thus, you see, the comment was not only mistaken but utterly preposterous. How- ever, it would seem to be impossible for our people—some of them, at least—to confine their articles to what they have really understood. In proof I cite the endless columns of theoretical- socialist matter by K-Z,13' Symmachos3 et al who, with their economic blunders and false perspectives and ignorance of socialist literature, furnish the means best calculated to destroy completely the superiority hitherto enjoyed by the German movement in the field of theory. Marx all but issued a statement on the subject of this comment.

But enough of complaining. I only trust that the hopes and expectations engendered by this injudicious and precipitate unification will be fulfilled, that the bulk of the Lassalleans will prove amenable to conversion from the Lassalle cult and adopt a more reasonable view of their real class position, and that the split, which will come as surely as two times two is four, will take place in what are for us the most favourable circumstances. But that I should also believe all this is more than anyone could ask.

Aside from Germany and Austria, the country to which we should continue to devote most of our attention is Russia. There, as in Germany, the government is the movement's principal ally. An infinitely better one, however, than our Bismarck-Stieber- Tessendorfs. The Russian court party, now more or less in the ascendant, is seeking to reverse all the concessions made during the 'new era' of 1861 132 and the years that ensued, and to do so in true Russian style. Once again, for instance, only the 'sons of the upper classes' are to go to university and, in order to bring this about, all the rest are failed in their school-leaving examinations. In 1873 alone this fate befell no less than 24,000 young people, thus totally barring their way to a career, for they were even expressly banned from becoming elementary school-teachers! And then they're surprised at the spread of 'nihilism' in Russia. If Walster, with his knowledge of Russian, were to summarise a few of the pamphlets emanating from the liberal opposition and published by B. Behr in Berlin,b or if somebody could be found

[^1]: a Karl Kautsky's pen-name - b Engels is presumably referring to the following pamphlets that appeared in Berlin in 1875: [Koshelev] A. Kome Ae BT>, Haute nojioj Kenie ; 06t> o&mu HHOMh 3e MJiee Jiadtniu eb Pocciu ; Ofnuan MMCKOR dy Md ez> Pocciu ; [Vasilchikov] A. Bac HAb HHKOBi>, TIuch MO Munucmpy napodnaio npocetuieuin zparfrj Tojicmo My; [Samarin and Dmitriev] K). Ca Map HHT» H M. ^MHTpie B-h, Peeojiwv,io HHbiü K0Hcepeamu3Mb.



££*£« l e w * u M!è*i2Sb^ s — — J ! — 1 - - — ~ .

[^1]: Extracts made by Marx from A. I. Koshelev's book On Communal Landownership in Russia, Berlin, 1875





