---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "67. Engels to Philipp Pauli. 8 November "
Page_Range: "133-134"
---

# 67. Engels to Philipp Pauli. 8 November 



**[p. 104]**

friends there told me that you intended to return thither from Gmünd.

With sincere regards, Your

K. M.

First published in Weg und Ziel, Nr. 5, Wien, Mai 1978

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

67

ENGELS TO PHILIPP PAULI

IN RHEINAU

London, 8 November 1875 (122 Regent's Park Road) Dear Pauli,

We got back here safely last Saturday afternoon, having stopped overnight in Bingen, Cologne and Dover.135 In accordance with your advice we took the steamer from Bingen to Cologne and didn't regret it for one instant. The crossing from Ostend was quite good for the time of year, though my wife suffered a little from seasickness for a while. In Dover, where we stayed at the Lord Warden, we recalled how once, in this same hotel, an old Englishman with six daughters had said: 'THANK GOD, TS THE COMFORTS OF AN ENGLISH HOTEL'—consisting of a good bed and a bad breakfast and unpolished boots, for which they charged us the trifling sum of 16/-, say, sixteen shillings.

Once again my wife and I would like to say how deeply grateful we are to you and your dear wife for receiving us so warmly and for promising to take Pumps under your wing every so often during her exile; and we are definitely counting not only on your bringing Mrs Pauli over here as soon as possible, but also on your regarding our house as your own whenever you come to London

With sincere regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: WITH OR WITHOUT NOTICE.



