---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "70. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 12[- 17] November "
Page_Range: "135-139"
---

# 70. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 12[- 17] November 



**[p. 106]**

Last Saturday I and my wife returned from Heidelberg where we had taken our little one to spend a year en pension.135 On the return journey we drank a truly excellent Oberingelheimer at the Domhotel; I at once ordered some to be sent to me and would ask you to arrange to pay Mr Theodor Metz, Domhotel, Cologne, 35 talers=l05 marks for my account. Cologne is a town of miracles. Thus, between the Cathedral and the Central Station, I came upon a gentleman so similar to Hermann 3 as to be indistinguishable from him, save that he seemed to have grown somewhat, had a more grizzled beard and looked frightfully serious. I was only waiting—alas in vain—for him to go through the usual performance of collecting himself before falling into his arms. This miracle happened last Friday morning between 10 and 11 o'clock.

Love to Mathildeb and the children.

Your

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 2, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921 „ , ,. , , . r ,. , , , .. Published in English for the first time

70

London, 12[-17] November 1875

Mon cher Monsieur Lavrov,

1. Of Darwin's doctrine, I accept the theory of evolution, but assume Darwin's method of verification (STRUGGLE FOR LIFE, NATURAL

[^1]: ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV138

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: Enfin, de retour d'un voyage en Allemagne,135 j'arrive à votre article,0

[^4]: que je viens de lire avec beaucoup d'intérêt.d Voici mes observations y relatives, rédigées en allemand ce que me permettra d'être plus concis? 13

[^5]: a Hermann Engels - b Mathilde Engels - c See this volume, p. 91. - d [P. L. Lav- rov,] 'Coitia AH3Mi> H 6opb6a 3a cyuiec TBOBa Hie', Bneped&l, No. 17, 15 (3) September 1875. - e At last, on my return from a trip to Germany, I have got round to your article which I have just read with great interest. Here are my observations relating to it, written in German and thus enabling me to be more concise.





**[p. 107]**

SELECTION) to be merely a first, provisional, incomplete expression of a newly discovered fact. Before Darwin, the very people who now, wherever they look, see nothing but the struggle for existence

(Vogt, Büchner, Moleschott and others), once laid particular stress on co-operation in organic nature, the way in which the plant kingdom supplies oxygen and food to the animal kingdom and, conversely, the latter supplies plants with carbonic acid and manure, as indicated notably by Liebig. Both conceptions are to some extent justified, but each is as one-sided and narrow as the other. The interaction of natural bodies—both dead and living— comprises harmony as well as strife, struggle as well as co- operation. Hence, if a self-styled naturalist takes it upon himself to subsume all the manifold wealth of historical development under the one-sided and meagre axiom 'struggle for existence', a phrase which, even in the field of nature, can only be accepted cum grano salis," his method damns itself from the outset.

2. Of the three ubèzdennyie Darwinistyh you cite, only Hellwald would seem worthy of mention. After all, Seidlitz is at best no more than a minor luminary and Robert Byr a novelist, whose novel Drei Mal is currently appearing in Ueber Land und Meer. And that's where all his rodomontade belongs.

3. While not denying the merits of your mode of attack, which I might describe as psychological, I would for myself have chosen a different one. Every one of us is more or less swayed by the intellectual medium in which he predominantly moves. For Russia, where you are better acquainted with your public than I am, and for a propagandist journal which appeals to the sviazujuscij affect—the moral sense—your method is probably the better one. For Germany, where false sentimentality has wrought and still wreaks such untold havoc, it would not be suitable, since it would be misunderstood and a sentimental twist put upon it. In our case, hatred is needed rather than love—at any rate to start off with—and, above all, the abandonment of all remnants of German idealism, the placing of material facts in the historical context that is theirs by right. Hence I would—and some time perhaps will—attack these bourgeois Darwinians in about the following terms:

All that the Darwinian theory of the struggle for existence boils down to is an extrapolation from society to animate nature of

[^1]: a with a grain of salt - b convinced Darwinians (hereinafter Engels quotes Lavrov's article in Latin transcription)





**[p. 108]**

Hobbes' theory of the bellum omnium contra omnes* and of the bourgeois-economic theory of competition together with the Malthusian theory of population. Having accomplished this feat (the absolute admissibility of which, as indicated above under 1, I contest, especially where the Malthusian theory is concerned), these people proceed to re-extrapolate the same theories from organic nature to history, and then claim to have proved their validity as eternal laws of human society. The puerility of this procedure is self-evident, and there is no need to waste words on it. If, however, I did wish to enlarge upon it, I should represent them, firstly as bad economists and secondly as bad naturalists and philosophers.

4. The essential distinction between human and animal society is that the most animals do is garner, whereas humans produce. This unique but crucial distinction alone makes it impossible simply to extrapolate the laws of animal societies to human societies. What it does make possible, as you rightly remark, is that

celovëk vel borjbu ne toljko za suscestvovanie, no za naslazdenie i za uvelicenie svojich naslazdenij gotov byl dlja vyssago naslazdenija otrecsja ot nissich P

While not contesting the conclusions you proceed to draw from this, I would, from my own premisses, draw the following inferences: At a certain stage, then, human production reaches such a level that not only necessary requirements are produced, but also luxuries if, to begin with, only for a minority. The struggle for existence—if, for the moment, this category be allowed—thus becomes a struggle for enjoyment, not just for the means of subsistence, but for the means of development—socially produced means of development—and in respect of this stage the categories of animal kingdom are no longer applicable. If, however, as has now happened, production in its capitalist form produces means of subsistence and development far in excess of what can be consumed by capitalist society since it keeps the great mass of real producers artificially at a distance from these means of subsistence and development; if, by its own existential law, that society is compelled continually to raise what is, for its own purposes, an already excessive production and hence periodically, every ten years, gets to the point of destroying, not only huge

[^1]: a war of all against all (an expression from Th. Hobbes' Elemente, philosophica de cive and Leviathan, or the Matter, Form and Power of the Commonwealth Ecclesiastical and Civil. Preface). - b man was not simply engaged in a struggle for existence but also for enjoyment and for the intensification of his enjoyment was prepared to forego less high for the sake of higher enjoyment (italics by Engels)





**[p. 109]**

quantitites of products, but even the productive forces them- selves—what meaning still attaches to talk of the 'struggle for existence'? For in that case the struggle for existence can consist only in this—that the producing class takes over the management of production and distribution from the class formerly entrusted with that task but now no longer capable of it, and this, in effect, is socialist revolution.

I might remark en passant that the mere consideration of previous history as a series of class struggles is enough to reveal the utter shallowness of the view of that same history as a slightly modified representation of the 'struggle for existence'. Hence it's a favour I'd never do these bogus naturalists.

5. For the same reason I would have formulated rather differently your substantially correct proposition,

cto ideja solidarnosti dlja oblegcenija borjby mogla vyrosti nakonec do togo, ctoby ochvatitj vcë celovêcestvo i protivupostavitj jego, kak solidarnoje obscestvo bratjev, ostaljnomu mini mineralov, rasteniji i zivotnych.3

6. I cannot, on the other hand, agree that the borjba vsëch protiv vséchh was the first phase of human evolution. I should regard the social instinct as one of the most essential factors in the evolution of humans from apes. T h e first humans must have lived in bands and, as far back as we can see, we find that such was the case.

17 novembre. J'ai été de nouveau interrompu et je reprends ces lignes aujourd'hui pour vous les remettre. Vous voyez que mes observations se rattachent plutôt à la forme, à la méthode de votre attaque, qu'au fond. J'espère que vous les trouverez assez claires, je les ai écrites à la hâte et en

[^1]: les relisant, je voudrais changer bien des mots, mais je crains de rendre le manuscrit trop illisible. Te vous salue cordialement!1 . F. Engels First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, 1928

[^2]: a that the idea of solidarity as a means of alleviating the struggle might finally gain the whole of mankind and pit it, as a fraternal society imbued with solidarity, against the rest of the world of minerals, plants and animals - b war of all against all - c 17 November. Having again been interrupted, I have today resumed this letter so that it may go off to you. You will have seen that my observations apply- rather to the form, to the method, of your attack than to its substance. I hope you will find them sufficiently clear; I wrote them in haste and, upon rereading them, find many words I should like to alter, but I fear to make the manuscript unduly illegible.

[^3]: With cordial regards.



