---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "72. Marx to Morel. Probably autumn "
Page_Range: "139-141"
---

# 72. Marx to Morel. Probably autumn 



**[p. 71]**

ENGELS TO PAUL KERSTEN

IN LONDON

[London,] 24 November 1875 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W. Dear Mr Kersten,

I have just received your esteemed note of this morning140 and hasten to inform you that I shall be pleased to see you and your friend at my house next Sunday evening at about six o'clock.

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

[Engels' later note on Kersten's letter]

[18]75. Kersten has not been seen any more.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

72

MARX TO MOREL

[London, probably autumn 1875] Monsieur Morel,

Be so kind as to let me know, through Mr Theisz, your neighbour, what has become of the three copies of Capital* which you received from me.

Salutations,

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a the French edition of the first volume of Capital





**[p. 73]**

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV141

IN LONDON

[London,] 3 December 1875 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

My dear Friend,

A carbuncle (and on my left nipple to boot)—which you may actually inspect for yourself by coming to call on me—makes it quite impossible for me to go out in the evening to attend the meeting of 4 December. For that matter, I should only have reiterated the opinion I have upheld for the past thirty years,142

namely that the emancipation of Poland is one of the precondi- tions for the emancipation of the working class in Europe. The new conspiracies of the Holy Alliance 143 provide further proof of this.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

74

[London,] 4 December 1875, midday 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Wroblewski,

This morning I awoke with so violent a cold in the head that it almost prevents me from talking. Hence, to my great regret, it will not be possible for me to attend your Polish meeting tonight, the more so since the evening promises to be one which will combine

[^1]: First published in full, in Russian, in Printed according to the original Letopisi marksizma, Book V, Moscow- Leningrad, 1928 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO WALERY WRÖBLEWSKI141

[^3]: IN LONDON



