---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "73. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 3 December Ill 74. Engels to Walery Wröblewski. 4 December Ill 75. Engels to Friedrich Lessner. 16 December "
Page_Range: "141-142"
---

# 73. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 3 December Ill 74. Engels to Walery Wröblewski. 4 December Ill 75. Engels to Friedrich Lessner. 16 December 



**[p. 112]**

My feelings for the cause of the Polish people, feelings to which I am sorry not to be able to give expression tonight, will always remain the same; I shall always regard the liberation of Poland as being one of the foundation stones of the ultimate liberation of the European proletariat and, in particular, of the liberation of the other Slav nationalities. So long as the division and the subjection of the Polish people continues, so, too, will endure and reproduce itself with fatal inevitability the Holy Alliance between those who partitioned Poland, an alliance which signifies nothing but bondage for the Russian, Hungarian and German peoples, just as it does for the Polish people. Long Live Poland!

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in full in: Marx and Printed according to the original Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

75

ENGELS T O FRIEDRICH LESSNER

[London,] 16 December 1875 Dear Lessner,

Your

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: Frankel, who was imprudent enough to live in Vienna u n d e r an assumed name, has been found out and arrested. T h e French Embassy are demanding his extradition for arson and for taking part in the shooting of the Dominican monks.144 But this is nonsensical, for a country does not extradite its own nationals but only foreigners, assuming in the first place that there could be any question of extradition here. H e will probably get off with a token punishment for using a false name.

[^3]: F. E.

[^4]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time



