---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "77. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 4 April "
Page_Range: "143-144"
---

# 77. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 4 April 



**[p. 114]**

1876

77

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE145

IN HOBOKEN

London, 4 April 1876 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

(PAY ATTENTION TO THE ADDRESS; IT IS 4 1 NOW

INSTEAD OF 1 , BUT SAME STREET)

My dear Friend,

It gave me great pleasure to see your handwriting again at last. My interpretation of your silence was correct, that is to say it tallied with your own explanation. I assure that we over here have also experienced more than enough mudslinging, though it was not done in so brazenly public a manner (and even that wasn't lacking in the early days after the Hague Congress20). But here one might say with Chernyshevsky: 'He who treads the path of history must not be afraid of getting besmirched'.146

I sent you the last fifteen livraisons du* Capitalh at the beginning of January, namely on Monday 3 January (I made a note of every copy I sent off at that time, which is why I know the date). However, I'm not surprised that you haven't had them, for no less than three copies consigned to Paris from here did not arrive, and fresh ones had to be sent off. At the beginning of January there is such a HURLY-BURLY in the post office over here that to send anything by post is irresponsible. I shall send you a further fifteen numbers this week. I only regret that you didn't get consignment No. 1, since it is precisely this part, in particular the section on the accumulation process, that I have substantially revised and hence would like you to have read.

[^1]: Engels and I cannot come to Philadelphia14' because we have too much work on our hands—I, especially, have even less time to spare inasmuch as MY STATE OF HEALTH still compels me to lose ABOUT 2 MONTHS taking the cure at Karlsbad.

[^2]: a instalments of - b the French edition of the first volume of Capital



