---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "80. Engels to Marx. 24 May "
Page_Range: "146-148"
---

# 80. Engels to Marx. 24 May 



**[p. 117]**

With warm regards from my wife and myself to you, your wife and the children.

Most cordially yours,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

79

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN LONDON

[London,] 18 May 1876

Dear Friend,

Pio's address is 15 Hargwyne Street, Stockwell, S. W.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

80

ENGELS TO MARX

Ramsgate,151 24 May 1876 3 Adelaide Gardens Dear Moor,

I have just received the two letters enclosed herewith.152 The curse of paid agitators, of the semi-literate, lies heavy on our party

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON





**[p. 118]**

in Germany. If things go on at this rate the Lassalleans will soon be more lucid than anyone else because they assimilate less rubbish and Lassalle's writings provide the least noxious form of agitation. I wonder what this man Most really wants of us and what we should do to satisfy him. Obviously, these people imagine that Dühring, by his scurrilous onslaughts upon you, has rendered himself invulnerable vis-à-vis ourselves, for, if we make fun of his theoretical nonsense, it will look as though it's out of revenge for those personalities! The ruder Dühring is, the more humble and propitiating we are to be, and can, in fact, thank our stars that Mr Most, besides requiring us to point out Mr Dühring's howlers kindly and privily to him (as if nothing more than howlers was involved) in order that he might eliminate them from the next edition,153 shouldn't ask us to kiss his most worthy of posteriors. This fellow—Most, I mean—has contrived to do a résumé of the whole of Capital1^4 without understanding a word of the thing. Of this the letter provides striking proof while showing up the fellow for what he is. All such nonsense would be out of the question if only, instead of Wilhelm,3 there were at the top a man with some modicum of theoretical insight, someone who wasn't eager to print every and any kind of nonsense—the crazier the better—and commend it to the workers with all the authority of the Volksstaat.

So far as that silly ass Wilhelm is concerned, all this is simply a welcome pretext to dun us for manuscripts. What a party leader!

I enclose an interesting news item from Constantinople in yesterday's Daily Newsc; one is all the more prepared to credit the man in that the softas' revolution lo6 goes very much against the grain with him. The affair in the east is about TO COME TO A HEAD; the Serbians' renewed attempt to raise a loan, likewise their suspension of bills of exchange and the fresh demands of the Herzegovinian insurgentslo7 are all evidence of the extent of Russia's machina- tions there. I am curious to see what turn things will take.

We've had our first rainy day here; yesterday there was only a brief shower. I hope all continues to go well with Jenny.158 Lizzie and I send our love to all of you, the Longuets and Lafargues.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Enfin,h the business has made my blood boil, and the question is whether it isn't about time we seriously reconsidered our position vis-à-vis these gentlemen.153

[^2]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b In short - c 'The Revolution in Constantinople', The Daily News, No. 9386, 23 May 1876.



