---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "81. Marx to Engels. 25 May "
Page_Range: "148-151"
---

# 81. Marx to Engels. 25 May 



**[p. 119]**

I have just noticed that Wilhelm has sent me the whole of Most's manuscript1M in a wrapper. Who knows whether that is interna- tionally admissible and hence whether it will arrive? Would you go and see some time if it's there and, IF SO, send it to me? I shall be staying here until the Friday of next week!1 Mrs Leeson will show you where she keeps any papers, etc., that arrive for me.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. III, Bd. 4. Berlin, 1931 n m e

81

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 25 May 1876

Dear FRED,

At the same time as this letter I am posting off Most's manuscript159 in the inadequately packed state in which it arrived. I opened the enclosed scrawl from Wilhelmb because I thought it had something to do with Most's affair. In addition, I removed from your house a communication from the GREAT NORTHERN RAILWAY intending to forward it to you because I thought it was a business letter, but now discover it to be simply a PROGRAMME OF

I consider that, if one is to adopt a 'position vis-à-vis these gentlemen' one can do so only by criticising Dühring without any compunction. He has obviously been secretly at work among the literary loutish careerists devoted to him in order to obviate such criticism; they for their part have been counting on Liebknecht's weakness of which they are well aware. It was, BY THE BY, Liebknecht's duty, and he should be told as much, to let these laddies know that he had repeatedly asked for such criticism and that we had long (for the business started after my first return from Karlsbad43) refused on the grounds that the work was too

[^1]: TOURIST ARRANGEMENTS.

[^2]: •' 2 June - b Wilhelm Liebknecht





**[p. 120]**

paltry. As he knows, and as his letters to us go to prove, the thing only seemed worth doing when, by repeatedly passing on to us the louts' letters, he drew our attention to the threat of debased propaganda within the party.lob

As regards Mr Most in specie,3 he must by the nature of things regard Dühring as an authentic thinker because of the latter's having broadcast the discovery, not only in a lecture to workers in Berlin, but subsequently in black and white, that Most was the only one to have made some sense out of Capital.160 Dühring systematically flatters these louts—something they cannot com- plain we do. Most and Co.'s vexation over the way you dumbfounded the Swabian Proudhonist161 is typical. It serves as a terrible example before which they quail, and they are trying to prevent such a thing ever happening again by means of tittle-tattle, stalwart bonhomie and outraged brotherly love.

Certainly, the root of the trouble is and will remain Liebknecht's want of manuscripts, in which, generally speaking, his editorial talent seems to be concentrated. However, the pettiness with which he avoids according Becker's history of the French Commune13 so much as a word of recognition, let alone publishing an extract or two from it, proves that even the want of manuscripts is not the only governing factor.

You may remember that, in a recent conversation we had about Turkey, I drew your attention to the possibility of a puritan party (based on the Koran) amongst the Turks. This has now supervened. According to a news item from Constantinople in the Frankfurter Zeitung, there is a plan, if things continue as they are, to remove the Sultan and put his brother in his place.162 The correspondent, who speaks Turkish and has much personal intercourse with Turks in Constantinople, insists inter alia that they know very well what Ignatiyev is up to, and that he is the source of all the disquieting rumours circulating among the Christians in Constantinople. Of one thing we may be sure: the Turks are not to be got rid of WITHOUT HARNESS ON THEIR BACK, and the Russians, who did not dare (or, perhaps, could not, due to lack of money) act swiftly and thus seize time by the forelock, may perhaps by the present ADVENTURE contribute more to the collapse of their own régime than to that of the Turks in Europe.

Jennychen is well, but the little boy is somewhat seedy, though it's nothing of consequence, the doctor says. He is to be called

[^1]: 11 in particular - b B. Becker, Geschichte der Revolutionären Pariser Kommune in den Jahren 1789 bis 1794.





**[p. 121]**

Jean (after Longuet's father) Laurent (NICKNAME OF LAURA) Frederick (in your honour).

The Copenhagen people have invited me by telegram, as well as in a letter to Pio (who left on Mondaya), to attend a working men's congress (beginning of June).163 It's fantastic to suppose I should now be able to give guest performances of this kind.

Today our park has been boarded off. Funny how ancient Teutonic customs survive as curiosities in England. This is the safeguarding of 'genuine freehold' by fencing off and hence separating it from the common mark.

Pumps has written long letters to my wife and Tussy. Even if the spelling sometimes isn't up to scratch, she has really made astonishing progress in the matter of style and ease of expression, which are far more important.

Kindest regards to Madame Lizzy.

Your

K. Marx

What a jackass Dizzyb has become! At a moment when England is completely isolated, he insists on keeping a dozen or more Fenians to himself!164

As regards 'Richter'/ Liebknecht shouldn't confine himself to mere HINTS when uttering warnings of this kind.165 While there may be a possibility that my address book disappeared along with Richter, I don't for the time being believe it.

The fact of Eichhoff's working for Arnim was, of course, known to us long before Liebknecht, nor is there anything in the least surprising about it, in view of Eichhoff's hatred of Bismarck and Stieber. Notabene, in the Frankfurter Zeitung there is a Prussian warrant against Arnim, in accordance with which he is to be relieved of his money and handed over to the Berlin police; the authorities abroad will have their expenses paid and are assured of their services being requited in kind! (This on account of the suppression of documents for which he had already been sen- tenced.) 166

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a 22 May - b Benjamin Disraeli - c Dmitry Richter



