---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "82. Engels to Marx. 28 May "
Page_Range: "151-153"
---

# 82. Engels to Marx. 28 May 



**[p. 82]**

ENGELS TO MARX52

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 28 May 1876

Dear Moor,

It's all very well for you to talk. You can lie in a warm bed — study Russian agrarian relations in particular and rent in general without anything to interrupt you—but I have to sit on a hard bench, drink cold wine, and all of a sudden drop everything else and break a lance with the tedious Dühring.155 However, it can't be helped, I suppose, even if it means letting myself in for a controversy to which there is no foreseeable end; for otherwise I'll get no peace, and anyway, amicus3 Most's panegyric on Dühring's

Cursus der Philosophie159 has shown me exactly from what quarter and how the attack must be made. It's essential to include that book as well because in many crucial points it reveals the weak sides and foundations of the arguments contained in the Ökono- mie more clearly.167 I shall order it straight away. For there's no philosophy proper—formal logic, dialectics, metaphysics, etc.—in it at all, rather it's supposed to present a course in general knowledge in which nature, history, society, state, law, etc., are discussed in what purports to be an internal relation. Again, there is a whole chapter in which the future, or so-called 'free', society is depicted in its less economic aspects and, inter alia, a syllabus is already laid down for the primary and secondary schools of the future. Here, then, one finds platitudinousness in an even simpler form than in the political economy, so that, by taking both books together, one can kill two birds with one stone by exposing that side of the fellow as well. As regards the magnanimous chap's view of history—that it was nothing but rubbish till Dühring came along—the book affords one the additional advantage of being able to quote his own preposterous words. ANYHOW, I HAVE HIM ON THE HIP Now.b My plan is laid—j'ai mon plan. I shall begin by taking a wholly objective and apparently serious look at the stuff; then, as evidence of its nonsensicality on the one hand and platitudinousness on the other begins to mount up, my treatment of it will become correspond- ingly severe until eventually I come down on it like a ton of bricks.

[^1]: a friend - b Paraphrased words from Shakespeare's comedy The Merchant of Venice, Act. IV, Scene 1.





**[p. 123]**

In this way Most & Co. will be deprived of the plea of 'uncharitableness', etc., while Diihring will still get his deserts. These gentlemen ought to be shown that we have more ways than one of dealing with such folk.

I hope Wilhelm3 will print Most's article in the Neue Welt, for which it was evidently written. As always, Most is incapable of copying and has Dühring write the most absurd nonsense about natural science, e.g. the detachment of rings (according to Kant's theory) from fixed starsl

The trouble with Wilhelm isn't simply a want of manuscripts, something that could be overcome by printing more articles on topical questions, etc., as was done in Hepner's and Bios' time. It is Wilhelm's urge to make good the shortcomings of our theory, to have an answer to every philistine objection and to have a picture of future society, because that's another thing about which your philistine is always pestering them with questions; he is, besides, intent on being as independent of us theoretically as possible, and in this, considering his complete ignorance of theory, he has always been far more successful than he himself is aware. But he has thus put me in the position of having to remind myself that, compared with the theoretical bunglers on the Volksstaat, Dühring is at least an educated man and his operab are better at any rate than the products of these subjectively and objectively obscure gentlemen.

You were absolutely right about the Turkish business and I only hope the affair will proceed satisfactorily; during the past week it appears to have hung fire somewhat and an oriental revolution, more than any other, calls for a prompt decision. The Sultanc— and this is the reason for the complaints about his constant requests for money—has accumulated a vast HOARD in the palace, so vast that the softas156 have demanded that he hand over £5,000,000 of it, which means that there must be far more. The presentation of the Gorchakov Note of 3 emperors will, one may hope, bring the matter to a head.

Please convey my best thanks to Jenny and Longuet for the honour they have done me; I shall try and show myself worthy of it. I trust the little boy with the three potent names is all right again.*1

My re-reading of early history and my studies in the field of natural science have rendered me yeoman service where Dühr-

[^1]: Wilhelm Liebknecht - b works - c Abdul Aziz - d See this volume, pp. 120-21.



