---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "83. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 June "
Page_Range: "153-154"
---

# 83. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 June 



**[p. 124]**

inga is concerned, and have done much to make things easier for me. Natural science, in particular, is a field in which I feel very much more at home and one in which I am able to move about with a fair amount of freedom and assurance, albeit with con- siderable caution. I am beginning to see an end even to this task.169 The thing's beginning to take shape in my head, no small contributory factor being the idle existence here at the seaside, where I am able to turn over the details in my mind. In so vast a field it is absolutely essential to break off one's systematic studies every now and again, and ruminate upon what one has learnt.

Ever since 1853 Mr Helmholtz has been continuously harping upon the thing-in-itself and hasn't got it sorted out yet. The fellow doesn't hesitate to go on calmly bringing out reprints of the balderdash he had published before Darwin.170

Lizzie and I send our love to all of you. We shall be returning to London '3l on Friday.b I'm very glad to hear that Pumps is doing so well in the matter of stylec; I, of course, have noticed it too, if to a lesser extent.

Your

F. E.

83

[London, 14 June 1876]

Dear Friend,

I am today sending you for the third time livraisons4 Nos. 31-44 of Capital"; should you once more fail to receive them, let me

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE171

[^5]: IN HOBOKEN

[^6]: a F. Engels, Anti-Diihring. - b 2 June - c See this volume, p. 121. - d instalments '* the French edition of the first volume of Capital



