---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "84. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 14 June "
Page_Range: "154-155"
---

# 84. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 14 June 



**[p. 125]**

know immediately, then I shall pick a SERIOUS QUARREL with the GENERAL POST OFFICE here. As for meddling by Dr Kugelmann (resp. Meissner, which I cannot credit, though I shall inquire further from the man himself), I was greatly surprised to hear of it since I am not yet a 'goner' and hence no one apart from myself has any say in the disposal of my writings.172

By 'scandalous goings-on' I meant what you suppose, but shan't be needing it until towards the end of September.3

Shall send you a copy of the Most,1'4 corrected by me, forthwith; didn't put my name to it because I should then have had to make even more alterations (I had to delete the bits about value, money, wages and much else, and substitute things of my own).

More anon. Warm regards from the whole FAMILY.

Your

K. M.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von loh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, . , . . , , . . Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx U.A. an Published in English for the-first F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 t i m e

84

[London, 14 June 1876]

Warmest regards from one family to the other,

Your

K. M.

[^1]: MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT173

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: Herewith — for communication to those concerned in Chem- nitz — a copy of Most's thing, with corrections of what are often very bad printing errors.1'4

[^4]: •' See this volume, p. 115. - b jocular name for Wilhelm Liebknecht



