---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "87. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 16 June "
Page_Range: "157-158"
---

# 87. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 16 June 



**[p. 128]**

privately, and he had not yet had time to go and see you. I told him I had written to you, whereupon he said he would also write.3

I shall write and give Liebknecht the gist of your letter. At the same time I feel that it might be better not to let R. know anything about what has happened. When Liebknecht shows my letter to his friends, the latter—I feel sure—will do all in their power (for they are honest working men) to right the wrong they have done their comrade.

Last week's Pall Mall Gazette carried an article fulminating against Russia's financial policy.b

Yours ever,

K. Marx

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, 1928 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

87

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

[London,] 16 June 1876 122 Regent's Park Road

My dear Mr Lavrov,

A short while ago Liebknecht wrote asking me to inform you that R.c was under suspicion and, since I could not undertake such a mission without so much as a single fact to go on, I told him so outright.

Here is his reply, which I pass on to you in strict confidence:

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: 'Last winter R. tried in the most conspicuous way to get hold of a packet of letters that was due to be sent me in Berlin. He was tipsy and, in consequence, went about it clumsily so that he was caught out. For hours, befuddled as he was, he was obsessed by the thought of getting hold of the packet, and in this he succeeded, but was forced by his companions to drop it into the letter-box, which he did after an attempt to substitute it had failed. Those who were present on this occasion had, up

[^3]: a See next letter. - •> 'Russian Credit', The Pall Mall Gazette, No. 3529, Vol. XXIII, 10 June 1876. - c Dmitry Richter



