---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "88. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 30 June "
Page_Range: "158-159"
---

# 88. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 30 June 



**[p. 129]**

till then, been absolutely convinced of his honesty, but now they began to «under. Drunkenness, it is true, sometimes brings strange thoughts into a man's head, but nothing that had not already been there when he was sober. In vino Veritas" does after all have a modicum of truth in it. I shall not mention here other highly suspicious circumstances, these not being so grave as the one I have related. But it is noteworthy that R. should have repeatedly offered himself as intermediary in the carrying of letters and that he should have asked for introductions to all manner of party members.'b

I am sorry that repeated interruptions should have prevented my passing on this communication before now; I really don't know what to make of the thing.

I trust that this letter finds you in good health. My regards to Mr Smirnov.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, jg2§ Translated from the French and German Published in English for the first time

88

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

London, 30 June 1876

My dear Mr Lavrov,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: To console you for the ban placed by Mr Bismarck on Vperedc

[^3]: in Germany, I must inform you that, six days since, I saw it on public display in bookshop windows in Heidelberg.1'4 Mr Bismarck

[^4]: a Truth comes out in wine. - b Engels quotes Liebknecht's letter in German. - • Thus in the original.



