---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "89. Engels to Marx. 25 July "
Page_Range: "159-160"
---

# 89. Engels to Marx. 25 July 



**[p. 130]**

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

89

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Ramsgate,175 25 July 1876 11 Camden Square Dear Moor,

The COLLAPSE of the Serbs is stupendous.176 The campaign was intended to set the whole of Turkey in flames, and everywhere the tinder is damp—Montenegro has betrayed the campaign for her own private ends, Bosnia has absolutely no intention of rebelling now that Serbia proposes to liberate her, and the worthy Bulgarians aren't lifting a finger. The Serbian army of liberation is having to live at its own expense and, after a swashbuckling

[^1]: Have written to Lafargue asking him to let us know what day he is arriving, Friday or Saturday.15

[^2]: Herewith Wilhelm'sa letter with enclosure by Most. You see what sort of people they are—both of them. Take Wilhelm's portentous attitude to the 'attempts at a rapprochement'.b As though one—that is anyone—could become involved with canaille who have been convicted of such treason! And as though any kind of rapprochement could lead to anything! What is supposed to happen when they have effected it? If, circumstances being what they are and the situation what it is, these people want to resume the role of the International, LET THEM PLEASE THEMSELVES AND BAD MANNERS

[^3]: TO THEM!

[^4]: Wilhelm Liebknecht's - b See this volume, p. 184.



