---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "90. Marx to Engels. 26 July "
Page_Range: "160-162"
---

# 90. Marx to Engels. 26 July 



**[p. 131]**

offensive, withdraw into its robber's lair without having been seriously defeated anywhere.— No doubt that will also serve as a lesson to the Romanians, in which case the Russian plans will be pretty well in the soup.

For the rest, I console myself here with Dühring's philosophy3— never before has anyone written such arrant rubbish. Windy platitudes—nothing more, interspersed with utter drivel, but the whole thing dressed up, not without skill, for a public with which the author is thoroughly familiar—a public that wants by means of beggar's soupb and little effort to lay down the law about everything. The man is as if cut out for the socialism and philosophy of the milliards era.118

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

90

MARX TO ENGELS

SEASIDE or no SEASIDE, you must recall that you did not leave till last Mondayd; moreover, according to the RELICTS living at No. 122,e you will both of you be returning in the middle or at the end of this week (or so I was informed only yesterday).175 As for last week, Laura (and I accompanied her, as my wife had written to say she was very unwell) spent the second part of it in Brighton (Lafargue came down on Saturday and returned with myself and Laura on Sunday); Longuet and Jennychen, however,

[^1]: IN RAMSGATE

[^2]: [London,] 26 Julyc 1876

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a E. Diihring, Cursus der Philosophie - b expression from Goethe's Faust, Part I, Scene 6 ('Hexenküche') - c June in the original - d 24 July - e i.e. in Engels' house in Regent's Park Road

[^5]: 11-406





**[p. 132]**

were still SCHOOLBOUND.177 The Lafargues will be coming down to Ramsgate this Friday or Saturday, and will return on Sunday, since Laf argue cannot interrupt his BUSINESS94 and Laura has to resume her teaching on Monday. The only week she will have off is the last week in August. (She has got to make up this week for the one day she missed last week, which, in this heat, is far from agreeable.)

I shall pass on the contents of your letter15 to the other members of the family.

My wife was still very unwell when we arrived, and slightly better when we left her. As soon as she feels fit enough she will certainly wish to spend a few days in Ramsgate. During the next day or two Lenchen will be completely taken up with the preparations for Tussy's trip.178

We were told in Brighton that Madame Bravo used to be a ballet dancer and Madame Cox her DRESSMAKER. During my wife's stay in Brighton, Mrs Bravo gave GREAT PUBLIC (plus ou moins3) DINNER PARTIES there.

In the last Bnepedz! there's a disgustingly sycophantic article about Bakunin's funeral,b at which Guillaume, Brousse, the two Reclus and l'illustre0 Cafiero were the chief ACTORS. Bakunin is depicted therein as the 'giant' of the Revolution. We are promised a sequel by the same correspondent on the subject of the plans put forward after the funeral for a coalition between the two Internationals, namely the Jurassians who want a 'FREE FEDERATION' of workers, and the Germans who aspire to a 'People's State' f Volksstaat]. To achieve this, it was said, all that was needed was to reframe Article 3 of the Rules in accordance with the version adopted at the 'Congress of 1873' (Guillaume's congress).179 In a short paragraph in the Volksstaat (I don't know whether you've read it yet) Liebknecht declares that nobody could desire this more than we (i.e. he); but, incorrigible TALKER that he is, goes on to say: 'Let us see deeds instead of words'.d Naturally, he is gratified that Mr Guillaume should proclaim the 'People's State' the be-all and end-all of the non-Bakuninist International. Lavrov clearly consid- ers it a good BUSINESS MANOEUVRE to accept Bakuninist articles, thus also committing that PARTY to his paper.e

The Brighton AQUARIUM has really come into its own since the time (three years ago) when I witnessed its beginnings.180 In accordance with the compromise it has reached with PARSON POWER, it

[^1]: a more or less - b 'Bep Hi,, 4 IIOAH. lïoxopo HM M. A. Ea KVHHHa', Bnepedb!, No. 37, 15 July 1876. - c the illustrious - d 'Das Begräbniß Bakunin's', Der Volksstaat, No. 82, 16 July 1876. - « Bneped!



