---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "91. Engels to Philip p Pauli. 11 August "
Page_Range: "162-163"
---

# 91. Engels to Philip p Pauli. 11 August 



**[p. 133]**

now stays open on Sunday afternoons (until the evening), but on the arid condition that the poor devils of EXCURSIONISTS shall not obtain a drop of liquid, not even undistilled water. You ought to go and have a look at it one of these days.

Love to the whole FAMILY and kind regards to Madame Pauli.a

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

91

ENGELS TO PHILIPP PAULI

IN RHEINAU

Ramsgate, 11 August 1876 11 Camden Square

Dear Pauli,

On Fridayb I duly proceeded to Cologne as planned and would have gone on overnight to London via Ostend had not the confounded midge bite on my left hand swollen to truly colossal proportions. So I went to an hotel in Cologne and held my hand in iced water for about an hour, which relieved the worst of the inflammation; on Saturday to England via Flushing. At Chatham I found a train going to Ramsgate and came straight here.175 When I arrived in London on Tuesday I found Schorlemmer at the Marxes preparing to leave for Darmstadt on Wednesday, where he will doubtless arrive today.

The crossing from Flushing was once again as smooth as glass; I'm heartily sick of it by now; a bit of tossing about is all part of

[^1]: It's still very fine here, moderately hot summer temperatures and a cool wind off the sea, on top of which the bottled beer is excellent and salt water bathing 'a proper treat',0 as Nadler's seamstress would say.181 His stuff has made me laugh a lot; the small town patriot of '48 is particularly well portrayed.182

[^2]: •' See this volume, p. 116. - b 4 August - c Engels has 'e wohres Laubsa V (dialect).

[^3]: 11*



