---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "92. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 15 August "
Page_Range: "163-164"
---

# 92. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 15 August 



**[p. 134]**

the game, otherwise one has no idea of having been at sea. But that's something I can have whenever I want here aboard the pleasure boats which sail every afternoon.

We are staying here until Monday fortnight and in London shall, I trust, retire from the very idle life we've been a-Ieadin' of.

The trip and the sea-bathing have done my wife a great deal of good, so I have reason to hope that I shall also be able to get her through the winter in passable health. Both she and I send our kindest regards to you, your wife and the children, and in the hope that Rheinau's gnat population will shortly diminish I shall close because of incipient table-laying.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , ,. Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

92

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

Ramsgate, 15 August 1876 11 Camden Square My dear Mr Lavrov,

I hope our poor Smirnov will have strength enough to get over his illness. He has been working harder than the delicate state of his health allows, and he would be well-advised to take it a bit easier. With warmest regards both to him and to yourself.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: On my return from Germany l7s I found awaiting me your letter of the 7th which I hastened to pass on to Liebknecht.15 Since the people concerned are completely unknown to me, there was little else I could do.183

[^3]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time



