---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "101. Marx to Max Oppenheim. 9 September "
Page_Range: "174-175"
---

# 101. Marx to Max Oppenheim. 9 September 



**[p. 145]**

make her acquaintance at your home in Prague; however, I see from your letter that she is still staying in Aachen.

My cure ends on Sunday.3 Monday is therefore the day appointed for our departure for Prague178; nevertheless, it's possible that our stay at Karlsbad will have to be prolonged. My daughter has suddenly become unwell. I hope it's nothing serious; I'm expecting a second visit from the doctor" this evening. You shall have further information as soon as I can communicate something more definite.

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , , . , , . ^ ,., r • ,.. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

101

MARX TO MAX OPPENHEIM

[Karlsbad,] 9 September 1876 Dear Friend,

Very many thanks from self and daughter0 for your kind letter. She had a nasty fever, had to stay in bed for three days and at this moment is still confined to her room; but she is now quite out of danger thanks to the speedy intervention of Dr Fleckles junior. It's unlikely we'll be able to leave for Prague before Wednesday.d

However, I'll notify you of the exact day before our departure.

Trusting meanwhile that we shall see you again shortly.

Yours,

Karl Marx

[^1]: IN PRAGUE

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , , . , , . Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a 10 September - b presumably Ferdinand Fleckles - c Eleanor Marx ' ' 1 3 September



