---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "104. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 15 September "
Page_Range: "176-177"
---

# 104. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 15 September 



**[p. 147]**

was on the brink of pneumonia; speedy action by Dr Fleckles jun., her doctor, saved her from a long and dangerous illness.

As a result of this contingency, however, we shall have to stay here until Fridaya for her to undergo after-treatment. We shall leave Karlsbad at 10.47 and arrive in Prague (State Railway Station) at 5.50 in the afternoon.

So until we meet again,

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , .. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

104

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

[London,] 15 September 1876 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Mr Lavrov,

At the bottom of this note I append a few observations that Liebknecht has just sent me on the subject of the people you mentioned in your letter.b You will see that Liebknecht disclaims all responsibility for what D.c may have written and what Ch. might have done.

I trust Mr Smirnov is getting better.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: 'The letters from me, which G.e allowed to fall into the hands of the police, were from the outset intended for Stieber's eyes—not, however, the numerous letters from the Russians. L. is mistaken if he imagines that I confided in any Russian refugee. I take no responsibility for such people's chatter, and chatter they

[^3]: a 15 September - b See this volume, p. 134. - c Vladimir Dekhterev - d Ivan Cher- nyshev - e Grigory Gurevich - f Lavrov

[^4]: 12-406



