---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "105. Marx to Ferdinand Fleckles. 21 September "
Page_Range: "177-178"
---

# 105. Marx to Ferdinand Fleckles. 21 September 



**[p. 148]**

do to a fearsome extent. Ch. went to Berlin not at my behest, though admittedly I was aware of it; there was no longer any damage to be done there.'2

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , r , ^ Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French and German Published in English for the first time

105

MARX TO FERDINAND FLECKLES

IN KARLSBAD

Liège, Belgium, 21 September 1876 Hôtel de Suède

Dear Fleckles,

I am sending you POST-HASTE a line or two concerning an urgent matter.

A medical examination of my friend, Nikolai Utin, aged 35, has indicated incipient fatty degeneration of the heart. Karlsbad has been recommended to him, but since he is exceptionally busy in the spring, summer and autumn—he is an engineer in charge of big railway and similar undertakings—he can only spare time for treatment in December and during the winter months.

Since he is greatly afraid of the cold, he would like to know whether he might not go to Vichy rather than Karlsbad.

It is of course difficult, perhaps impossible, to reply to such a question without knowledge of his person. But at all events you will be able to give a general opinion as to whether Vichy might serve as a substitute for Karlsbad in cases of this kind.

The man in question is one of my dearest friends and for that reason I take the liberty of appealing to your friendship and requesting your early reply (to my London address: 41 Maitland Park Road, London). The childb and I leave here for home tomorrow.178

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

[^1]: a Engels quotes Liebknecht's letter in German.- b Eleanor Marx



