---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "106. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 23 September "
Page_Range: "178-180"
---

# 106. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 23 September 



**[p. 149]**

[From Eleanor Marx in French]

Dear Doctor,

I've just received the photographs from Karlsbad—but only eleven—have you got one of them? If so, send it off to me—if not, will you tell Hirsch?

I'm eagerly awaiting the letter you sent to London. Let me have some news about 'Marion', which interests me greatly—and work away at the last acts.

Good-bye—write and send me your portraits.

Yours sincerely,

Eleanor Marx

First published in Marx-Engels-Lassalle. Printed according to the original Eine Bibliographie des Sozialismus, Berlin, 1994 Translated from the German and French Published in English for the first time

106

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

London, 23 September 1876

Dear Bracke,

A French work by Lissagaray, Histoire de la Commune (500-600 pages), is now being printed, publisher, H. Kistemaeckers, librairie contemporaine, Boulevard du Nord, 60, Bruxelles. This will be the first authentic history of the Commune. Not only has Lissagaray made use of all the published sources—he is also in possession of the material inaccessible to all others, quite apart from his having witnessed with his own eyes most of the events he depicts.

Yesterday I had from him a letter addressed to him by Julius Grunzig of Berlin, in which the latter offers himself as translator.

D'abord,* I don't know Grunzig; perhaps you can let me have some information about him.

Secondly, however, he says nothing whatever about where the thing is to be published or how and, even if we could use Mr

[^1]: IN BRUNSWICK

[^2]: First

[^3]: 12*





**[p. 150]**

Grunzig as translator (this depends entirely on his ability to do such work), he would be taken on only as translator, and in no case would he be entrusted with its publication.

I would suggest that you undertake to bring out this work, which is of importance to our party and of interest to the German reading public at large. But Lissagaray—who, needless to say, as a refugee in London, isn't exactly in a bed of roses—must, in return for the German publication rights conceded by him, get a share of the profits which you yourself should determine.

As for the translation, I would send Grunzig—since he was the first to apply and is also recommended by Most—some sample sheets to translate in order to assure myself of his competence.

Should you accept the proposal, the original would be sent to you (and/or the translator) in batches, so that the German translation might appear pretty well simultaneously with the French original.

Publication by instalments, as proposed by Grunzig in his letter, is inadmissible since the thing would then appear in German sooner than in French, and the Belgian publisher would object to this.

As regards payment of the translator, that is a matter to be settled exclusively between yourself and him.

You would oblige me by letting me have an early reply so that no time may be lost, and I can, if needs be, write to another publisher.

With best regards from myself and Engels.

Yours,

Karl Marx

My address is: 41 Maitland Park Road, N.W., London.

[^1]: First published in: K. Marx-F. Engels, Printed according to the original Briefe an A. Bebel, W. Liebknecht, K. Ka- , ,. utsky und andere, Teil I, Moskau-Lenin- Published in English for the first grad, 1933 t , m e



