---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "108. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 7 October "
Page_Range: "182-183"
---

# 108. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 7 October 



**[p. 108]**

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN LONDON

[London,] 7 October 1876

My dear Friend,

I have just received a letter from Paris (from an employee2 at Lachatre's booksellers) from which it transpires that the banning of Capitalb is simply a myth, a myth, moreover, assiduously disseminated by the police and by Mr Quest himself, the judicial administrator appointed by the late Buffet as sequestrator of Lachatre's booksellers.38

Because it had been published under the state of siege, Capital—now that the state of siege has been raised—could only be banned by the regular courts, and the authorities fear a scandal of this kind. So they are seeking to suppress the book by underhand methods of intrigue.

You would greatly oblige me by advising me of the contents of the letter in which your agent Guyot mentions the banning of the book.c Kovalevsky, for his part, has Russian friends in Paris prepared to attest that even Lachatre's booksellers has refused to sell them the work.

Armed with these proofs I shall be able to threaten Mr Quest—a great miser, albeit a millionaire—with legal proceedings and a demand for damages and interest. It is only through the force of such threats that he has finally ordered the printing of the last fifteen instalments.11 Under French law he is, vis-à-vis myself, merely Mr Lachatre's representative, his deputy, and must fulfil all the conditions laid down in my contract with the latter.

Last September's Revue des deux Mondes contains a so-called critique of Capital by Mr Laveleye.e Only by reading it can one get any idea of the idiocy of our bourgeois 'thinkers'. Mr Laveleye is, however, naive enough to admit that, once you accept the doctrines of Adam Smith and Ricardo or even—horribile dictu1— those of the Careys and the Bastiats, there is no means of escaping the subversive doctrines of Capital.

[^1]: a presumably from Henri Oriol - b the French edition of the first volume of Capital - c See this volume, p. 440. - d Ibid., p. 92. - e E. de Laveleye, 'Le socialisme contemporain en Allemagne. I. Les théoriciens' Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. 17, Paris,

[^2]: 1876. - f dreadful to relate



