---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "109. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 October "
Page_Range: "183-186"
---

# 109. Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 7 October 



**[p. 154]**

I congratulate you on your LEADING ARTICLE in Bnepedb! on Pan-Slav lyricism in Russia.2 It is not only a masterpiece, it is above all a great act of moral courage.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

How is Smirnov's health progressing?

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad,

j 928 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

109

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

According to a letter you wrote to Engels, you told the Congress that Engels was going to deal with Dühring. Instead, much to his displeasure, he found—and showed me immediately on my arrival from Karlsbad 178—a report in the Volksstaat according to which you had said that I (something I would never dream of doing) was going to take issue with Mr Dühring.191

Engels is busy with his work on Dühring.d It entails a considerable sacrifice on his part, as he had to break off an incomparably more important piece of worke to that end.

The fact that your Congress proffered a fraternal hand to Guillaume and Co., is, given the form it took, relatively innocuous.'92 However, any real co-operation with these people, who

[^1]: London, 7 October 1876 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. Dear LIBRARY,15

[^2]: Resolve for me, O Oerindur, this dichotomy of nature!c

[^3]: a [P. L. Lavrov,] 'Pycc Kie nepe4T> Ktf KHO-c Aa BÄHCKHMt Bonpoco Mi,', Bnepeàt!, No. 42, 1 October 1876. - b jocular name for Wilhelm Liebknecht - c from Adolf Milliner's drama Die Schuld, Act II, Scene 5 - d Anti-Diihring - e Dialectics of Nature





**[p. 155]**

have systematically worked to bring about the dissolution of the International, is to be avoided under all circumstances. The very few working men in the Jura, Italy and Spain whom they are still leading by the nose, may FOR OUGHT I KNOW be upright men. They themselves are incorrigible intriguers who, now that they have discovered their nullity outside the International, would like to worm their way in again through the back door so that they may resume their previous role.193

I had already been in communication with Bracke about the translation into German of Lissagaray's book before your propo- sal2 reached me; I have concluded an agreement with Bracke.194

It is about time the Volksstaat, or rather, I should now say, the Vorwärts,*95 put a finger at last on the real source of the rot in dealing with the oriental question.196 In one of its most recent numbers the Kölnische Zeitung says that one might echo the words of a famous diplomat: 'Il n'y a plus d'Europe!,h; once upon a time it was possible to speak of other powers, now the stage is held by only one power—Russia!

But why is this? The German papers, in so far as they aren't dancing to Russia's tune, now heap reproaches on Disraeli, now accuse Andrâssy of weak-minded vacillation.

Yet the nub of the matter is—Bismarck's policy. He embarked on it after Sedan113 during the Franco-Prussian War. At this moment he is hamstringing Austria (and even England, relatively speaking) by his official flirtation with Russia; indeed, he is hamstringing the entire Continent. The passage (according to the latest advices) of armed Russian troops through the Romanian provinces (under the auspices of a Hohenzollernc) has led everyone in Paris and London to believe in the existence of an offensive and defensive alliance between Russia and Prussia. In fact, by his policy of conquest in France, Bismarck has disarmed Germany vis-à-vis Russia and condemned her to the shameful role she is playing at this moment, et qui est véritablement 'la honte de l'Europe'^

Here in England a turning-point has been reached; the curtain is about to fall on the sentimental farce staged by the Whigs in their haste to reconquer the LOAVES AND FISHES OF OFFICE and for which an appropriate chorus has been provided from among the workers—such canaille as Mottershead, Hales et tutti quanti"— under the influence of bourgeois FIVE POUND NOTES; Gladstone has

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 149-52. - b There is no longer a Europe! - c Carol I - d and which is truly 'the shame of Europe' (an allusion to E. de Girardin's pamphlet La Honte de l'Europe) - e and whoever else there may be





**[p. 156]**

sounded the retreat, ditto Lord Russell, and now only the brazen Bob Lowe (the Australian ex-demagogue, the creature who, during the recent reform movement, followed the example of Edmund Burke and branded the working class a SWINISH MULTITUDE) is making a fool of himself with his talk of the AUTOCRAT OF ALL THE RUSSIAS AS 'THE ONLY FATHER OF THE OPPRESSED'. Amongst the London workers, it is precisely the most progressive and resolute who have staged a PROTEST MEETING against the Pan-Slavophiles. They realise that, each time the working class acts as chorus to the governing classes (to a Bright, Gladstone, etc.), it is perpetrating an infamy. Caeterum censeo11 that it behoves you to write a LEADING ARTICLE revealing how sorry a figure is cut by the German-Prussian, ostensibly anti-Russian, bourgeois press which, while at most presuming to criticise the ministers of other countries, maintains a most devout silence in regard to its own Bismarck. With warmest regards to your family.

Your

Moor

Apropos. The rascal from Antwerp, whom Guillaume and Co., by their intrigues among the unwitting Dutch workers, foisted upon the Hague Congress20 as its provisional president, one van den Abeele, has now himself been unmasked by his own people as an agent of the French government and has accordingly been thrown out of those sections of the International still eking out an existence in Belgium. This, after another of the same clique, Mr Bastelica, had publicly disclosed in Strasbourg that he was a Bonapartist agent! b

The Frankfurter Zeitung's 'unbaptized crusader'0 is playing a thoroughly grotesque role in the oriental imbroglio.

[^1]: [Note at the beginning of the letter]

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a For the rest, I consider. These are the initial words of Cato the Elder's famous expression: 'Caeterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam' (For the rest, I consider that Carthage must be destroyed). - b See this volume, p. 184. - c Presumably Leopold Sonnemann.

[^5]: First published in W. Liebknecht. Brief- wechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels, Den Haag, 1963



