---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "110. Marx to Leo Frankel. 13 October "
Page_Range: "186-188"
---

# 110. Marx to Leo Frankel. 13 October 



**[p. 110]**

MARX TO LEO FRANKEL198

IN BUDAPEST

London, 13 October 1876 41 Maitland Park Grescent, N. W.

Dear Frankel,

I could not answer your long letter, for which I am much obliged, because I was not clear about your situation, that is, did not know whether a letter from me might not be to your detriment if intercepted by chance, no matter how harmless its content might be.199 Will you be so kind as to explain to me, if possible, the following: What is the relationship between sown plains and highlands (the latter used possibly as pasture)?

You are quite right to take part in editing a workers' newspaper." As for the so-called Swiss international congress,200 it is the work of the Alliancists—Guillaume and Company.201 Knowing that they are worth absolutely nothing by themselves, they deem it necessary to step again into the limelight under the banner of 'unification', which they could not do alone.202 Their plan was supported by the Malons, Pindys and other Arnoulds, who, frightened at the fact that the workers are 'acting' in Paris without them, are out to bring themselves back to people's minds as patented representatives of the workers. On the other hand, Guillaume's group cunningly took in Bebel while he was in Switzerland. However, this matters but little. The Gotha Congress did not appoint any official representative to the Swiss congress but contented itself with general rhetoric about the community of workers' interests.192 Meanwhile I sent a warning to Leipzig, and if any of them goes to the congress as a private person, he will take a negative stance on the blandishments of long-standing conspirators against the International. How you acted as a former member of the General Council and a delegate to the Hague Congress20 is entirely understandable. You must not in the least succumb to the intoxication of reconciliation, a state in which scheming villains always swindle honest fools.

They have just begun printing Lissagaray's bookb; he is now busy reading the first proofs. The scoundrels, the so-called labour

[^1]: a Arbeiter-Wochen-Chronik - b Histoire de la Commune de 1871





**[p. 158]**

leaders (Englishmen), those whom I exposed at the Hague Congress, swallowed during the Russo-Bulgarian campaign over atrocities187 a handsome amount of five-pound notes from the great leaders Gladstone, Bright, Robert Lowe (the man who during the latest reform agitation 197 called the working class a swinish multitudea), Fawcett and others. But the plot is coming to a terrible end. These labour leaders, Mottershead and others, are the same dogs with whom it was impossible to hold a meeting against the butchers of the Commune.

I am sending you the latest issue of The Diplomatic Review. Despite the space it gives Urquhart to unload his inanities, the journal contains weighty facts concerning the Bulgarian epidemic of atrocities by which Russia has fooled the whole of Christian liberal Europe.b

I inform you on evidence from the most trustworthy source—and it would be a good thing to publish this fact in Hungarian papers—that some months ago the Russian government suspended the payment of interest due at fixed intervals to the Russian railways, and this completely in secret; every single department received private notification with orders to hold its tongue (and we know what that means in Russian). All this notwithstanding, the news of the fact reached not only me but also Renter's Telegraph Agency (the biggest member of the Holy Trinity of European telegraph agencies, Reuter—Havas—Wolff) but the good man withheld the news at the special request of the Russian Embassy in London.

In any case, this is an edifying symptom of Russia's financial embarrassment. Should the English bourgeois feel it, he will again become pro-Turkish, for no matter how much the Turks owe England, it is nothing compared to the Russian debt.

Warm regards from my whole family.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published, in Hungarian, in the Printed according to the news- newspaper Népszava, No. 142, Budapest, paper 17 June 1906 ^ , , „ Translated from the Hungarian Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 156. - b 'The Bulgarian Insurrection', The Diplomatic Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4, October 1876.



