---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "116. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann. 20 October "
Page_Range: "191-192"
---

# 116. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann. 20 October 



**[p. 116]**

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

London, 20 October 1876

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W. Dear Kugelmann,

You may give Mr Caro the most positive assurances that, aside from announcements of family events in the more distant past and personal statements signed with his name on the Vogt affair, etc., Marx has never written one line for the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung,205 and, if the gentlemen in Breslau3 know better, we can only treat it as a joke. We don't even know Mr Caro by name, though his friendship with Gorchakov leads us to suppose that he knows relatively little of Russia, for Gorchakov would not be on such a footing with people who were too well versed in this subject. So let us hope that the order which is still lacking will shortly pop into the buttonhole that is pining for it.

Just now I'm writing a work on Mr Dühring for the Vorwärts in Leipzig.153 For this purpose I need the review of Capital which you sent to Marx in March 1868 and which, if I'm not mistaken, was published by Dühring in a periodical appearing in Hildburg- hausen. ° Marx simply can't find it. Knowing how conscientious you are in all matters, I presume you have something about it among your notes from that time—the name, perhaps, of the periodical and the No. of the volume in which the thing appeared. If you could let me know this, I would order the volume and have it here within a few days. But if you can't, you should, under no circumstances, write to Dühring about it, for the slightest—even if indirect—contact with the man and, still more, the very slightest service rendered by him would impair my freedom of criticism in a matter in which I should preserve it to the utmost.

Work on the second volume b will be started again in a few days. If, by the way, one wishes to correct all the inanities about Marx that circulate in learned circles, one would have one's work cut out. Yesterday, for example, a Russian told us about a Russian professor who stubbornly maintained that Marx was now engaged solely in Russian studies and was doing so because firmly convinced que la commune russe ferait le tour du mondec\

[^1]: a Polish name: Wroclaw. - b of Capital - c that the Russian commune would make its way round the world



