---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "117. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 21 October "
Page_Range: "192-193"
---

# 117. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 21 October 



**[p. 163]**

The war in the Orient will doubtless really get going soon.207

Never before have the Russians been able to strike under such favourable diplomatic circumstances as now. Militarily speaking, on the other hand, circumstances are less favourable to Russia than in 1828, and financially very unfavourable, since no one will lend her anything. Just now I'm re-reading Moltke's history of the war of 1828-29a; a very good book although the man could not be frank about political matters.

Thank you for the Schäffle article.

Your

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 19,39 Published in English for the first time

117

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV

[London,] 21 October 1876

My dear Friend,

Enclosed a cutting from The Pall Mall Gazette. This extract from your leader (in No. 42 of Bneped?>!b) is badly translated, even though it was done by Sir etc. Rawlinson. Kovalevsky informed me of it and also sent me the thing. He asked me to lend him No. 42 of your journal, but not even the prettiest girl in France can give more than she's got. I had already sent it to Utin (Liège).

Kovalevsky also told me—you could make use of it in your journal208—that a detestable Russian clique, which purports to represent the leading Russian men of letters, and has announced its venture in these terms to Rawlinson and other English notables, intends to publish a review in London for the purpose of acquainting the English with the true politico-social movement in Russia. Golokhvastov would be editor-in-chief, with other col-

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: ;l [H. K. B.] von Moltke, Der russisch-türkische Feldzug in der europäischen Türkei

[^3]: 1X28 und 1829.- b See this volume, p. 154.

[^4]: 13-406



