---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "118. Engels to Ernst Dronke. 1 November "
Page_Range: "193-195"
---

# 118. Engels to Ernst Dronke. 1 November 



**[p. 164]**

laborators from that disgusting journal rpaoicda HUHba and also, so it is said, Prince Meshchersky.

The Russian government has already given signs of its insolvency by ordering the Bank of Petersburg to announce that it would no longer pay foreign bills of exchange in gold (and/or silver). I had been expecting this, but what passes all understand- ing is the fact that, for two or three weeks before settling on this 'disagreeable' measure, the aforesaid government had again perpetrated the folly of seeking artificially to maintain the rate of exchange in the London market. This has cost it nearly twenty million roubles; it might just as well have thrown the money into the Thames.

This absurd operation—the artificial maintenance of the rate of exchange at government expense—belongs to the eighteenth century. Today it is only the alchemists of Russia's finances who can go in for such things. Since Nicholas' death these grotesque, periodically repeated, manipulations have cost Russia at least 120 million roubles. But it is typical of a government which still seriously believes in the omnipotence of the State. Other governments do at least know that 'money has no master'.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

118

[London,] 1 November 1876 Dear Dronke,

I am writing today to tell you what I was on the point of telling you last Friday6 when you categorically refused to let me intervene in any way.

I am not in a position to lose the sum of £150, still less £200,

[^1]: First published abridged in La Revue Printed according to the original marxiste. No. 4, Paris, 1929 and in full, in Russian, in Letopisi marksizma. Book V, Translated from the French Moscow-Leningrad, 1928 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: ENGELS TO ERNST DRONKE209

[^3]: IN WATERLOO [Draft]

[^4]: a Grazhdanin (Citizen) - b 27 October





**[p. 165]**

nor, by the same token, to gamble with it. If I were still in business,210 when any loss incurred could be made good in the course of time, that would be a rather different matter. Hence, even if I were on a different footing with Götz, whom I barely know by sight, and even if I didn't find the whole transaction highly unpleasant, in that it can't be carried out without the prior knowledge of Kyllmann, and therefore of Dr Borchardt, I would, under no circumstances, undertake a guarantee of the kind you want.

Even if I were still in business, I obviously couldn't consider gaily staking, for old friendship's sake, the sum of £150 on a business about whose standing I know absolutely nothing. But all the same I could have gone further than I can now when it's no longer possible for me simply to write off a loss of this order. On the other hand, I should be glad to help you so long as it's simply a question of making funds available to you for a stated period without my incurring a risk of this kind.

You had offered my brother-in-law3 a POLICY amounting to £300 as collateral security. I told him that if he was willing to agree to your proposal I would pay him the £150 in the event of your not having paid it at the end of 6 months.b I could have raised the sum by then, which I was unable to do at that moment, and he would then have held the POLICY as security for myself. But he refused so much as to entertain the thing. Had you then made me exactly the same offer as you made my brother-in-law, I should not, it is true, have been in a position to advance you the £150 immediately, but no doubt something might have been arranged. Now, however, the latest American drawing has brought me a 5/20 bonus, the result being that I am in a position to make available over £150; it is at your disposal for a period of 6 months, provided you give me the POLICY as security. It will in any case be as safe with me as with anyone else, if not safer.

I have told you in all frankness how I see the matter and how far I'm able to go. Maybe you have other proposals to make, in which case I shall be glad to consider them. Just one final word: Whatever we may arrange, let it be arranged strictly between ourselves, with no third party, giving of guarantees,etc.; it's much simpler.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a Emil Blank - b See this volume, p. 161.

[^3]: 13*



