---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "119. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 6 November "
Page_Range: "195-196"
---

# 119. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 6 November 



**[p. 1932]**

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

London, 6 November 1876 Dear Bracke,

I have been comparing Grunzig's translation—first sheet—most scrupulously with the original3 and am about to inform him that I cannot accept his services.

In fact, to correct it (an occasional correction will doubtless be necessary with any translator) would take more time than if I were to translate it myself from start to finish. But I haven't the time for that. I cannot again go through the painful experience I endured in connection with the French translation of Capital.17

I'd be glad to have Kokosky, but he entirely lacks the deftness, the lightness of touch, which is precisely what the translation of this book needs.

I have already taken soundings in another quarter211 but doubt whether the person in question will have the time. Meanwhile, it would be as well for you to cast round if possible for a professional translator in Leipzig. Since the book in question is not intended purely for working-class readers, it would be foolish to go and look for a translator specifically within a party that is not well endowed with literary talent, i.e. to proceed from the outset on the assumption that the translator must be a party man.

From what I hear, B. Becker has found a publisher in Switzerland.b

Yours sincerely,

K. M.

The conciliation congress in Berne—Engels and I wrote and told Liebknecht the moment we heard of the Germans' intention to send their delegates to it—is, and has been from the start, nothing but a Bakuninist intrigue.200 What is more, proof of this reached us a few days ago from Portugal/ More anon.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow,

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a [P. O.] Lissagaray, Histoire de la Commune de 1871 (see this volume, pp. 149-50 and 152). - b See this volume, pp. 151-52. - c Ibid., pp. 173-74.



