---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "123. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 20 November "
Page_Range: "202-204"
---

# 123. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 20 November 



**[p. 123]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 20 November 1876 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Becker,

We have duly received your circular addressed to the Zurich section219 and are likewise of the opinion that the time has come to oppose the Bakuninists' pretensions to form an International off their own bat.200 Whether it is possible to achieve reorganisa- tion on the basis you propose, namely a federation of the big organised national bodies, is, I should say, very doubtful, since legislation in most countries prohibits such associations from corresponding, let alone amalgamating, with associations abroad. But that is a side issue and could easily be got round or altered, once people are fully convinced that the continued existence of each one of those big organisations is of greater importance than its formal entry into an international society. As it is, you will encounter in the Germans the same Platonic indifference which, as a party, they invariably evinced towards the old International.

My chief purpose in writing to you today is to propose a fresh field of activity for you in this connection. The Portuguese, with whom I still correspond and who are very well organised, complain loudly of the lack of attention shown them by our friends. They say that the German-Swiss, Germans, Austrians, Americans, etc., have not only failed to pass on information to them, but have not even replied to their letters, whereas they have been regularly inundated with parcels, invitations to congresses, felicitations, etc., by the Jurassians, Bakuninist Spaniards, Italians and Belgians, so that the Portuguese workers have come to regard these as the only people who still have any interest left either in the International or the Portuguese movement. As you will realise, they must be stout fellows indeed who nonetheless don't let themselves be side-tracked, and that such is the case will be apparent to you from the following letter which they sent to the Bakuninist Congress in Berne:

[^1]: 'We have been invited by the Federation of Cadiz to send representatives to the Berne Congress and have since then read, in the Bulletin jurassienne, the circular convening that Congress and setting forth its agenda. Not having received this invitation until very late on, the Portuguese socialists are unable to send any





**[p. 174]**

delegates; nevertheless, their Federal Council has resolved that we assure you of our moral solidarity with socialist workers all over the world, and state that we never have called that solidarity in question, nor ever shall let it be called in question; accordingly, the express compact of solidarity which you propose to conclude seems to us a formality that could well be dispensed with. 'Subscribing as we do most ardently to the unification of all proletarians, we send you our fraternal greetings. Long live the International Working Men's Association!'

Well, I shall write and tell these people about your plan and also send them one of your circulars, although it's doubtful whether they understand German. But you would be well advised to get in touch with them immediately. You can write to them in French; should they reply in Portuguese, I can translate the answer for you.

You might get the above letter published in the Tagwacht, likewise the fact that on 5 January and the following days they are going to hold a congress in Lisbon3 and will present a new party programme for discussion.220

The address is:

E.C. Azedo Gnecco Rua do Bemformoso 110, 2° Lisbonne, Portugal. That's where their paper, O Proteste is brought out; it's been going for over a year.

I hope that you will achieve something worthwhile and, if we can lend you a hand by providing addresses, etc., we shall gladly do so. Only you mustn't overburden us. Both of us, Marx and I, have quite specific theoretical work to do, of which, so far as we can now see, no one else would be capable, even if they were willing, and we must make use of the present universal lull to complete it. Yet who knows how soon some event won't suddenly involve us in the practical movement again? All the more reason for us to make use of the brief respite to carry the no less important theoretical side a little bit further.

Apropos. We have paid through Frankel for 12 instalments of the 12 copies of Stunden der Andachtb ordered by Marx and myself; hence we still have to pay for 3x12 instalments à 25 cts.=9 fr. If that is correct, let me know and I'll send you a money order.

The Vorwärts will shortly be publishing a critique of Dühring by me.c They had pestered me dreadfully before I took on this

[^1]: •' [Notice about the forthcoming congress of Portuguese socialists on 5 January 1877.] Die Tagwacht, No. 96, 2 December 1876.- b J. Ph. Becker, Neue Stunden der Andacht. - c F. Engels, Anti-Dühring.



