---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "124. Engels to Gustav Rasch. End of November "
Page_Range: "204-207"
---

# 124. Engels to Gustav Rasch. End of November 



**[p. 175]**

disagreeable task155—disagreeable because the man is blind so that the contest is unequal, and yet the chap's colossal arrogance precludes my taking that into account.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

124

ENGELS TO GUSTAV RASCH221

IN VIENNA

[Draft]

[London, end of November 1876]

Dear Mr Rasch,

The Schaible in question always has to go rushing into the breech on Blind's behalf wherever the latter has made things too hot for himself.222 That's what happened in the 1859 affair. Blind (at the end of May or the beginning of June 1859) had printed in London an anonymous flysheet, Zur Warnung,3 in which Karl Vogt was accused of allowing himself to be bribed with Bonapartist money and was denounced as a Bonapartist agent of the press in Germany. There was a request for its dissemination. This flysheet, printed in F. Hollinger's print-shop in London, was reproduced in Das Volk, a German paper printed in the same print-shop, from the original type which was still set up. Liebknecht saw the corrected proof, with corrections in Blind's handwriting, in this print-shop, and sent the flysheet to the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung, which reprinted it in June. Thereupon Vogt sued the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung for libel, the latter asked Liebknecht to provide proof; he turned to Blind, who stated that he had played no part whatever in the matter. Vogtb now distorted the matter, making out that Marx was the man behind Liebknecht and had written the flysheet. This now gave rise to a dispute between

[^1]: 11 A Warning - b Deleted in the original: 'thus winning his law-suit'.





**[p. 176]**

Marx and Blind in the columns of the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung.

Using affidavits sworn by the compositor, Vögele,—i.e. legal instruments—Marx proved that the latter and Hollinger had set the type for the flysheet which had been written in Blind's hand. Blind persuaded Hollinger to make a false declaration, namely that the flysheet had not been printed in his shop and that Blind had not been the author; in addition, together with Hollinger, he persuaded the compositor Wiehe to make an equally false statement to the effect that, having worked for Hollinger for 11 months, he could corroborate the latter's assertions. Relying on this, Blind declared the statement that he was the author to be a downright lie. At this, the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung terminated the controversy.3 Marx replied with a printed circular in English, declaring the above statements made by Blind and his witnesses to be a DELIBERATE LIE, and Blind himself to be A DELIBERATE LIAR (London, 4 February 1860).b Blind remained silent. But on 8 February 1860, the compositor Wiehe swore an affidavit before the stipendiary magistrate at Bow Street which contradicted his earlier statement:

1. he had not been employed by Hollinger for 11 months, 2. he had not been working at Hollinger's at the time the flysheet Zur Warnung was published,

3. he had heard from Vögele at the time that he (Vögele) and Hollinger had composed the flysheet in question, and that the manuscript had been in Blind's handwriting,

4. he himself had subsequently broken the types that were still standing into columns for reprinting in the Volk,

5. and had seen Hollinger give Liebknecht the proof-sheet corrected in Blind's hand and heard that, immediately afterwards, Hollinger had expressed his regret at having done so,

6. he had signed his earlier statement under pressure from Hollinger and Blind. Hollinger had promised him money while Blind had said he would give proof of his gratitude.0

Marx had copies of these documents circulated among various circles, and this elicited a reply. On 15 February a statement from Schaible appeared in The Daily Telegraph ; Schaible sent it (copy) to Marx, who replied 12 saying that this changed nothing, either as regards Blind's obtaining false testimony by underhand means, or

[^1]: a For the details see K. Marx, Herr Vogt (present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 125-27). - b K. Marx, 'Prosecution of the Augsburg Gazette' (ibid., pp. 10-11). - c Cf. present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 319-20.





**[p. 177]**

as regards Blind's criminal CONSPIRACY with Hollinger to obtain by underhand means Wiehe's signature for the spurious forged document.

Now, as then—Schaible to the rescue!a

Such are the facts. I know nothing further about the sorry fellow.

One more thing. Should you again do me the honour of referring to our encounter in London, might I request you to refrain in future from suggesting I talked about matters which were never the subject of discussion between us.223 As to the self-determination of human beings, I could only have said that, viewed in this general way, it makes no sense to me. As to the autonomy of nations, if I discussed it at all it was to deny the southern Slavs the right to use it as a pretext for lending themselves to Russian expansionist plans, just as I now heartily applaud the drubbing inflicted on the Serbs176; to the best of my knowledge, however, we never discussed a social republic or the executions in Baden. Again, you have only what were entirely fortuitous circumstances to thank for the fact that, consequent upon your article, Marx did not declare that he had never seen you, and hence could not possibly have conducted these conversa- tions.

I could not reply sooner as someone had borrowed my copy of Marx's Herr Vogt, in which the above may be found on pp. 55 et

Cordial regards.

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: seq.,b and did not return it until yesterday.

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^4]: Printed according to the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a Cf. the corresponding passage in Weber's opera Der Freischütz (libretto by Friedrich Kind), Act II, Scene 6. - b See present edition, Vol. 17, p. Ill ff.



