---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "126. Marx to Engels. 11 December "
Page_Range: "208-209"
---

# 126. Marx to Engels. 11 December 



**[p. 126]**

MARX TO ENGELS226

IN LONDON

[London,] 11 December 1876 DEAR FRED,

Kovalevsky came to see me yesterday, asked for the Hanssen22'; told him he should have it tomorrow evening; at the same time agreed that he and I should call on you that same evening (Tuesday).

I am sending you the Hanssen which, as I did, you will polish off with ease in a couple of hours.

Written about book-binding.

Salut. Your

K. M. After the conference (St. James)225 Mr Gladstone entered the gallery where Madame Novikov was sitting, offered her his arm—pour montrer* (or so he said according to Novikov's account) que l'alliance entre l'Angleterre et la Russie existe déjà"—and, with her on his arm, strutted through the vast throng which made way on both sides; he a relatively small, skinny chap, she a veritable dragoon. She remarked to Kovalevsky: que ces Anglais sont gauches!c

Generalissimus Chernyayev had twice asked Novikov by tele- graph whether he should also appear at the conference; she had to tell him that Mr Gladstone would be pleased to see him personally but thought a public appearance inexpedient.

At the conference (admission by TICKET) Harrison (who, in his article 'Cross and Crescent' in the Fortnightly,0 makes great play with a few HINTS recently picked up from Kovalevsky) told Howell to his face that all the workers present without exception belonged to a paid band well known to him (Harrison).

Unfortunately Charles Darwin also lent his name to the rotten demonstration; Lewes refused to do so.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- „ , ,. . , . _ ,. , . . rt 1913 Published in English m full for the first time

[^2]: a to show - b that the alliance between England and Russia already exists - c How gauche these English are! - d The Fortnightly Review, Vol. XX, London, 1 July-1 December 1876.

[^3]: 14-406



