---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "129. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 21 December "
Page_Range: "212-214"
---

# 129. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 21 December 



**[p. 183]**

4. the Russian Army is in the throes of reorganisation and hence hardly fit for war.

Love to Emmaa and the children, and the compliments of the season from

Your

Friedrich

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921

Published in English for the first time

129

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 21 December 1876 122 Regent's Park Road Dear Becker,

Have received your post card, the Précurseurs and two copies of the French address.231 If you could send a few more copies of the same, they would be most welcome (in French,—we'd be sending them on to Paris); we shall be glad to pay for them as soon as we know how much, say, 20 copies would cost.

Herewith money order for 15 francs, of which 9 fr. for the amount still outstanding on the Stunden der Andachth and 6 fr. for two half-year subscriptions to the Précurseur for Marx and myself. You can send me both the numbers as this saves postage, and I can give Marx his. It's a very good thing that we have a French paper in Switzerland again; the Jurassians are hopelessly addicted to cliquism and calumny, and it will enable us to demonstrate that peace with them is an impossibility. I couldn't send you articles regularly because I don't want to tell lies, and all that can be said of the workers' movement here is that it has degenerated into Trades Unionism of the pettiest variety, and the self-styled leaders, not excepting Eccarius, are tailing after the liberal bour- geoisie in order to tout their services as agitators against the alleg- ed Turkish atrocities,187 and advocate the betrayal of the Balkan

[^1]: a Emma Engels - b See this volume, p. 174.





**[p. 184]**

peninsula to the Russians in the interests of humanity and freedom.

The fact that De Paepe attended the Berne Congress200 is wholly consistent with his previous attitude. Since the time of the Hague Congress20 he had officially remained with the seceded Belgians,232 but as leader of the opposition, and is now really doing some good by persuading the Flemings to come out in favour of universal suffrage and factory legislation. This is the first sensible thing that has been done in Belgium. Now the Walloon braggarts will also have to co-operate. But for our people in Germany to have fallen into the Jurassian trap was inexcusable. Bakuninist organs everywhere exulted to high heaven when it became known that the Germans would be sending delegates to the Congress.192 Liebknecht knew exactly what he was doing; in reply to a question as to what we thought of the proffered conciliation and what position we would adopt, I had told him: no position at all15; the fellows were just the same as they had always been, and if anyone wished to burn his fingers by having any truck with them, let him do so. And then they went and acted in this silly, gullible way, as though they were dealing with the most noble, honest men.

Have you had the New York, or rather Philadelphia, resolutions regarding the dissolution of the General Council233? In case you haven't I am sending you a few copies; it might provide you people with fresh grounds for taking the thing in hand.

In Geneva an Italian and French paper is appearing under the aegis of the Terzaghi of whom we drew a character-sketch in our Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste? This person is now said to be abusing the Bakuninists. For, having long tolerated him, although he had already been denounced by us as a police spy, they were nevertheless eventually compelled to throw him out as such. He is simply a mouchara\b while his henchman Bastelica is a Bonapartist agent—in Strasbourg he published an invocation to the French workers to restore the Empire.

There's nothing to be done in Italy, Bakuninists everywhere, and in Spain I no longer have any address, but may soon be sent one.

Kindest regards, Your

[^1]: F. Engels First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association (see present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 499-501). - b informer



