---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "132. Engels to Hermann Engels. 9 January "
Page_Range: "216-217"
---

# 132. Engels to Hermann Engels. 9 January 



**[p. 187]**

They have asked for it, and they're going to be thoroughly hauled over the coals, you have my word for that.

Your

F. E.

First published in full, in Russian, in Printed according to the original Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Mos- and the text in the Vorwärts cow, 1932

Published in English for the first time

132

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

London, 9 January 1877

Dear Hermann,

Your letter duly received, with the remittance of £300 with which I shall credit you in accordance with the statement. Many thanks for this and also for the current account which I shall take a look at. Your having somewhat increased the amount of your remittance doesn't make any difference. I got it on Saturday evening3 when I had visitors here and, because of the plethora of visiting and PARTIES at this time of year, could not send you an acknowledgement of receipt until today, which you will, I hope, excuse.

I had no idea Hermann and Moritzb were at university. It will do them no harm at all to study for a year or two and, if they then want to go into the business, the knowledge they have gained will be all the more useful to them; the past two decades have thoroughly demolished the old commercial superstition that in business what is above all required is three years of quill driving, a good hand, the most execrable German, and a notable lack of knowledge. And should they wish to try something else, the whole world will be open to them.

Things may go hopelessly wrong for the Russians. I have always held that the introduction of general conscription238 would ruin

[^1]: a 6 January 1877 - b Hermann Friedrich and Rudolf Moritz Engels



