---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "133. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 21 January "
Page_Range: "217-219"
---

# 133. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 21 January 



**[p. 188]**

the Russian army. But that it would happen so fast and so gloriously was something I didn't expect. Everything's going to pieces, discipline and administration, officers and soldiers, there's a shortage of everything—far more so even than there was during your splendid mobilisation in 1852, for in Russia theft is assuming really grandiose proportions. The more stores and depots there are for mobilisation purposes, the less there is in them, since they merely provide occasion for theft. And, what is more, the Turks have never been in such good shape as they are today; they already have more troops in Bulgaria than the Russians would be able to throw in with their four army corps (144,000 men on paper). And those four army corps also comprise all the reserves called up in Poland, who would go over at the first opportunity. The Romanian army is there simply for the purpose of being taken prisoner, and the Serbian peasant militia won't find it so easy to muster any more men, and such as it does muster will have already had quite enough.

I am being summoned to table and it's half past five—time for the post. Love to all from

Your

Friedrich

133

[London,] 21 January 1877

Dear Bracke,

Congratulations on the most recent mustering of Social- Democratic forces in Germany.237 It has greatly impressed other countries, in particular England,where for years Berlin newspaper correspondents have done all they can to bemuse their British readers concerning the state of our party. But 'MURDER WILL OUT', as John Bull says whenever he goes bankrupt.

[^1]: First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921 „ , , . , , • T- ,-, r •_ r r ° Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE16

[^3]: IN BRUNSWICK





**[p. 189]**

Well, now I'd like to know at long last (didn't want to pester you about it during the election campaign) just where I am with Miss Isolde.3 She had sent me the first sample sheet of translation13; I had replied telling her she was fitted for the work provided she took her time and didn't go at it at full-tilt, and also sending her the four additional sheets.12 At the same time, however, I also let her have a pretty lengthy catalogue of sins relating to the sample sheet.194

This would seem to have been something of a shock to the little lady's nerves, for her reply betrayed a certain petulance. Undeter- red by this, I wrote again to the effect that I looked upon her as the translator of my choice.12 Since that time weeks have gone by without sight or sound of her. It is now absolutely essential that the young lady should decide, oui ou non,c and, if the first, that she should actually let me have some work. Perhaps you would be so good as to write and tell her this. Should she have defected, we shall have to try the Scheus,d although I'd be reluctant (not that it's in any way relevant) to have anything to do with the Scheus. There's no more time to be lost. Should the gracious Isolde decline, she would also have to return me the French sheets she has received.

Would you be so kind as to draw up a contract in duplicate—in accordance with the conditions we have agreed—of which one, with your signature, will be retained by Lissagaray and the other, with his signature, will be returned to you.

Salut.

Yours

K. Marx

[^1]: First published abridged in: P. Kampf f- meyer und Altmann, Vor dem Sozialisten- gesetz, Berlin, 1928 and in full in: K. Marx- F. Engels, Briefe an A. Bebel, W. Liebknecht, K. Kautsky und andere, Teil 1, Moskau- Leningrad, 1933

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: - c yes or no - J Andreas and Heinrich a Isolde Kurz - b See this volume, p. 172. Scheu



