---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "134. Marx to Ferdinand Fleckles. 21 January "
Page_Range: "219-220"
---

# 134. Marx to Ferdinand Fleckles. 21 January 



**[p. 134]**

MARX T O FERDINAND FLECKLES

IN KARLSBAD

[London,] 21 January 1877

Dear Friend,

T o begin with, my best thanks for the medicinal salts and my regret that your first, long letter went astray.

Tomorrow a small parcel of books goes off from here to Madame Wollmann, containing the French edition of Capital for your cousin and, for yourself (from the 'child'3), Lissagaray's Histoire de la Commune. T h e muster-roll of the Social-Democratic party in Germany on the occasion of the general elections237 has rudely alarmed, not only o u r amiable German philistine, but also les classes dominantes in England and France. An English paper comments sourly upon, inter alia, the contrast between 'THE MELODRAMATIC FITS AND STARTS OF THE FRENCH AND THE BUSINESSLIKE WAY OF PROCEEDING OF THE GERMAN SOCIALISTS'.

T h e increasing extent to which even the ideologists of the German middle classes are being affected by the insidious poison is evident from, amongst other things, a short pamphlet recently published by an old acquaintance of yours, Schäffle, entitled Die

Quintessenz des Socialismus. You ought to order the thing, if only for amusement's sake. It is full of unintentional comedy. For, on the one hand, the little book, as the author himself indicates, is aimed especially at Protestant clergymen who, after all, cannot leave flirtation with socialism entirely to their Catholic rivals. O n the other, Mr Schäffle, with a fantasy truly Swabian, paints so pretty a picture of the future socialist millennium as to make it seem the kingdom come of your cosy petty bourgeois, a paradise fit only for the Karl Mayers of this world.

Not only is the weather here unspeakable—close, damp, with a fog in so deep a tinge of yellow that one has, as I do, to keep the gaslight on throughout the morning, but the 'ORIENTAL QUESTION' is rampant. Wherever you go, you're buttonholed by un John Bull

[^1]: quelconque : 'Now, SIR, WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE ORIENTAL QUESTION?' Politeness precludes one from giving the only appropriate answer: 'I THINK, SIR, THAT YOU ARE A DAMNED ASS.'

[^2]: a Eleanor Marx - b some John Bull or other



