---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "135. Marx to Wilhelm Alexander Freund. 21 January "
Page_Range: "220-221"
---

# 135. Marx to Wilhelm Alexander Freund. 21 January 



**[p. 191]**

Whatever the outcome of the war,207 whether favourable or unfavourable to the Little Father in Petersburg,3 that 'sick man',239

deafened and confused by the hysterical philanthropic bellowing of the English liberal 'PARTY OF PROFIT AT ANY PRICE', has given the signal for a convulsion which has long been in the making within his own Empire, the ultimate result of which will be to put paid to the whole of old Europe's present status quo.

Please give your dear cousin my warmest regards and apply yourself seriously to the study of the English language, for if the worst comes to the worst, England is still the best place in which to set up medical quarters.

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

135

London, 21 January 1877 41 Maitland Park Crescent, N. W. Dear Friend Freund,b

My New Year's greetings to you and your dear wife are, unfortunately, belated owing to pressure of work and a sore throat which I caught during my last days in Karlsbad. My fate there was similar to that of Martin Luther's peasant who, given a leg up on one side of his horse, fell off on the other.240

My daughter' sends her best regards to your wife and yourself. She has, inter alia, been guilty of a translation, published by the local Shakespeare Society of which she is a member, of Professor Delius' 'Das epische Element in Shakespeare', a translation which has, however, earned her the highest praise from Mr Delius.241 She has requested me to ask you for the name of the Swabian anti-

[^1]: MARX TO WILHELM ALEXANDER FREUND16

[^2]: IN BRESLAU

[^3]: •' Alexander II - b A play on words by Marx: 'Freund'= friend. - c Eleanor Marx



