---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "136. Marx to Frederic Harrison. 21 January "
Page_Range: "221-222"
---

# 136. Marx to Frederic Harrison. 21 January 



**[p. 192]**

Shakespeare professor and the title of his book about which you spoke to us in Karlsbad.242 The matador of the Shakespeare Society here, Mr Furnivall, is determined not to forego enjoyment of that opus.

The 'Oriental Question' (which will end up with a revolution in Russia, whatever the outcome of the war against Turkey207), and the mustering of the Social-Democratic legions at home237 will perhaps have convinced the German cultural philistine that there are more important things in the world than Richard Wagner's music of the future.185

With kindest regards to you and your dear wife,

Your most sincere friend,

Karl Marx

Should you happen to see Dr Traube, would you be so good as to give him my kindest regards and remind him that he promised to send me the titles of his various publications. This would be of great importance to my friend Engels, who is engaged on a work on natural philosophy3 and intends to give more weight to Traube's achievements than has hitherto been done.243

136

MARX TO FREDERIC HARRISON

[London,] 21 January 1877 41 Maitland Park Crescent, N. W.

Dear Sir,

The bearer of this letter, my nephew, Mr Henry Juta of Cape Town, wants to complete his general studies at the London University, and, at the same time, to become a member of the Inner Temple.244 For the latter purpose he has to sign a paper stating that he is no attorney etc. and his own signature has to be

[^1]: First published in Vorwärts, Nr. 275, Basel, Printed according to the news- 16. Juni 1931, Beilage paper

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: a F. Engels, Dialectics of Nature.



