---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "137. Marx to Gabriel Deville. 23 January "
Page_Range: "222-223"
---

# 137. Marx to Gabriel Deville. 23 January 



**[p. 193]**

countersigned by two barristers attesting that he is a proper person etc. As the affair is very pressing, I have taken the liberty to direct him to you in the hope that you will be so kind as to instruct the young man how to find his way out of this difficulty. I have the honour, Sir, to be

Yours sincerely

Karl Marx

Fd. Harrison, Esq.

First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English) and in German, in

Neues Deutschland, Nr. 15, Berlin, 15. Januar 1963

137

MARX TO GABRIEL DEVILLE

IN PARIS

London, 23 January 1877 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Citizen,

On receiving your kind letter of 15 December, I wrote to our friend Hirsch about my obligations, stipulated in the contract, to Mr Lachâtre, the publisher of Capital, which do not admit of my agreeing to your project243 without his authorisation. I then wrote to the latter12 and from day to day vainly awaited his reply. Finally, a few days ago, I sent him a registered letter,12 the first having doubtless been intercepted—an everyday occurrence in the Prusso-German Empire. Pending Mr Lachâtre's reply, I should further point out that, even should he give his consent, Mr A. Quest would be quite capable of ordering the confiscation of every 'summary' of Capital. Since Mr Lachâtre had been convicted in absentia of 'communard' acts and was living abroad as a refugee, the judicial administration of Lachâtre's booksellers was placed by the Broglie ministry in the hands of Mr Quest who belongs to the dregs of the conservative party and who has done

[^1]: [Draft]



