---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "138. Engels to Hermann Ramm. 25 January "
Page_Range: "223-225"
---

# 138. Engels to Hermann Ramm. 25 January 



**[p. 194]**

everything in his power first to hold up the printing of my book and then to prevent its distribution. He would be just the man to play a trick on you, despite the authorisation from Mr Lachâtre vis-à-vis whom I am myself bound by a private contract but who, vis-à-vis Mr Quest, is entirely powerless, since this sequestrator is his legal trustee.

Under the circumstances I think that the best thing would be to put off for the moment 'a summary' of Capital, and in the meantime bring out a short review of it, if necessary in the form of a small pamphlet, which would be all the more useful in that Mr Block (in the Journal des Economistes)" and Mr Laveleye (in the Revue des deux Mondes)h have given the French public utterly false notions of Capital. Such a course had also been agreed at the outset by Mr Hirsch and myself.

Please accept my best thanks for your book which you were kind enough to send me and which is distinguished by great stylistic verve and a sound basis.

I trust the incident that has put us in touch with one another will be the starting point of a sustained correspondence.

Yours ever,

K. M.

138

ENGELS TO HERMANN RAMM

London, 25 January 1877 Dear Ramm,

Since I do not know whether Liebknecht is back from Offenbach,246 I am writing to you.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^2]: Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Translated from the French

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: IN LEIPZIG

[^7]: a M. Block, Les théoriciens du socialisme en Allemagne. Extrait du 'Journal des Économistes'. - b É. de Laveleye, 'Le socialisme contemporain en Allemagne. I. Les théoriciens', Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. 17, Paris, 1876.





**[p. 195]**

To begin with, it is nearly a fortnight now since I had any of the Dühring proof-sheets153 (the last, sent back at once, being Art.VI) and I'm afraid that a consignment may have gone astray.

Next, I had requested Liebknecht15 to send me the Nos. of the Neue Welt containing my biography of Wolff247; I received the first 4 numbers, but since then it was only from the mutilated Neue Welts used for packing the Vorwärts that I saw that the subsequent part had also appeared. Needless to say, I neither kept a copy of the manuscript here, nor did anything about getting hold of the thing, having taken Liebknecht at his word; would you be so good as to see to this before all numbers have been torn to pieces and used up?

As to the by-elections, we over here are very much in the dark. All we know is that Rittinghausen is 'in', as the English say.248 A pity that the Christian-Social chaplain, Laaf, was licked; in the first place, it would have been amusing to watch him steering a middle course through the Reichstag and, in the second, since he was evidently doomed to make an ass of himself, he would have stirred up dissension among the working men at Aachen, thus giving us a chance of introducing the thin end of the wedge.

What is most encouraging about the recent elections is the great progress made in the country, particularly in the big farming districts of Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg. Thence it's an easy step to Pomerania and Brandenburg and, once inroads have been made into the schnapps country," it will soon be all up with the Prussian monarchy.

Ever your friend,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, „ , ,. , , . _ .. , r , .. ,q?„ Published in English lor the tirst time

[^2]: See Engels' article 'Prussian Schnapps in the Reichstag'.



