---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "139. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 14 February "
Page_Range: "225-226"
---

# 139. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 14 February 



**[p. 139]**

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

[London,] 14 February 1877 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Bracke,

Lissagaray, who is otherwise completely in agreement with your draft contract, is firmly of the opinion that in every case the price (per copy) should be kept to the minimum quoted by you.1 4

So far as the free copies for himself are concerned, a dozen would amply suffice.

Apropos! Miss Isolde Kurz has written to me, partly to say that she will be sending you the manuscript direct, while the proof-sheets would come to me from you (I have no objection), partly to ask for a further consignment of sheets from the original; the latter have now been sent her by Lissagaray. But notabene, Lissagaray has also made all manner of alterations to the introduction, additions (very important ones) to the French original, etc., so that nothing should be printed in Brunswick before Isolde has made corresponding modifications to the initial sheets she has already translated. Thus, should Isolde's manuscript be already in Bruns- wick by the time my letter arrives, it should not be printed but returned to her for alteration.

It goes without saying that the German edition will acquire extra value as a result of these alterations and additions made by the author himself.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

K. Marx

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, „ , ,. , , . _ ,. , . 10,39 Published in English tor the first time



