---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "141. Engels to Marx. 23 February "
Page_Range: "227-230"
---

# 141. Engels to Marx. 23 February 



**[p. 198]**

elected and make speeches. The latter already applies to the school board here and, last November, I gave all my 7 votes to a lady who, as a result, had more votes than any of the other 7 candidates for election. Incidentally, the ladies who sit on school boards here are notable for the fact that they do very little talking and a great deal of working—as much on average as three men. Or perhaps it's a case of 'new brooms sweeping clean'? However, most of these 'brooms' are pretty ancient.

At all events we shall bear the September project constantly in mind and do all we can to implement it. And now I would beg you to convey my wife's and my own warm regards to Pauli and the children and accept our kindest regards on your own behalf.

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, . r. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

141

ENGELS TO MARX

Brighton, 23 February 1877 42 King's Road Dear Moor,

I wrote to Bignami last week, took out a subscription to the Plebe, and wrote to him about the elections.250 Three days ago, before we left,249 I received 3 numbers, and he is going to let me have some that are missing.251 My intervention could not have come at a better time.

Plebe, 7 January, reports proceedings at the Assizes against Bignami, the Questore (chief of police) of Turin (the self-same man who treated Terzaghi to a 'vermouth', see Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste3), for embezzlement (tout comme chez nousb). A policeman,

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. - b just like at home (a modified phrase from Nolant de Fatouville's comedy Arlequin, empereur dans la lune; 'tout comme ici' (just as here) is the stock response made by the people listening to Harlequin's inventions about life on the moon)





**[p. 199]**

one Blandini, stated that, on Bignami's orders, he had carried out a pro-forma" house search chez Terzaghi, having also been ordered by Bignami only to remove what Terzaghi should give him. When a warrant went out for Terzaghi's arrest, he had already been notified by another policeman, Premerlani, acting on Bignami's orders; Terzaghi era un agente segreto di Bignami che gli dava tre lire (francs) al giorno!* About which the Plebe remarked that this showed what use the fondi segreti dei governi di classec were put to. To which there came a reply from a little Bakuninist sheet, II Martellod—the name betrays my Cafiero.—Since discussion of the revolting Terzaghi case was not permissible, the little sheet fastened on the fondi segreti dei governi di classe: so in your case, it said, the governi non di classee would likewise have fondi segreti, so in your case, too, everything would remain as before—there follows all the same old anarchist rigmarole que l'on

sait.g Having replied to this in due form, the Plebe at once proceeded to attack the Bulletin Jurassien for having been sent into a rage by four lines in the Plebe and acting as though the Plebe were enraged although it had simply been edificatah by the Jurassien's insinuation.

The same No. contains a letter from E. Dörenberg (Drbg. of the Berliner Freie Presse) on the elections in Berlin.

No. of 16 February, letter from Brussels, 'Cesar De Paepe' about the recent Flemish agitation for factory laws and general suffrage, ends:

[^1]: Come to that, [said the Plebe,] one would have to be exceedingly ingenuo' to take the bait proffered by people who, green with envy, went knocking at door after door to beg for a bit of animosity towards us in return for their calumnies. The hand, which has long been sowing tares and discord, is sufficiently well known for its Loyolan i machinations to be instantly detectable and gli onesti non ne facciano tantosto giustizia?-

[^2]: Noi crediamo altresi di arrivare, con questo metodo, più prontamente e più puramente all'emancipazione del proletario, piuttosto che star Xi, abbaiando alia luna per degli anni e dei quarti di secolo, e attendendo che mamma Rivoluzione voglia degnarsi di venire a spezzarsi le catene dei lavoratori)

[^3]: a formal - b was a secret agent of Bignami's who gave him three lire a day. - c class governments' secret funds - d See La Plebe, 21 January 1877. - e non-class govern- ments - f secret funds - s we are familiar with - h edified - ' ingenuous - J from the name of St. Ignatius of Loyola, i.e. Jesuitical - k Honest folk won't take very long to size it up. - ' We likewise believe that we shall, by this means, achieve the emancipation of the proletariat more promptly and more thoroughly than if we were to stand for years and generations baying at the moon and waiting until Mother Revolution should deign to come and break the workers' chains.



A very delighted letter from Bignami today, in which he says he will print my stuff on the elections, and confirms that the Federazione dell'alta Italia,3 which extends from Venice to Turin and will shortly be holding a congress,252 vuole lottare sul terreno del suffragio universale.11 The Plebe is its official organ.

Thus the stronghold of lawyers, literati and dilettanti in Italy has been breached. And the best part of it is that all the former Alliance men201 in Milan, Mauro Gandolfi, etc., of Cuno's time also seem to have gone over. Indeed, a bogus working men's movement could not have survived long in an industrial city like Milan. And Northern Italy is decisive not only strategically, but also to the working men's movement throughout the whole length of the agrarian peninsula.

Thus the world government in Neuchâtel253 has nothing left that is uncontested except for Spain, and how long will that last?

If these events are to be followed more closely, by the way, it is high time that Mr Demuth took out a subscription to the Bul- letin jurassien, as agreed. After all, we've got to know what ana- themas are being uttered by the Holy See's universal dictator and deputy.'

Warmest regards to all,

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- schen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- gart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Federation of Northern Italy - b intends to fight on the terrain of universal suffrage - c James Guillaume



