---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "143. Engels to Marx. 2 March "
Page_Range: "230-232"
---

# 143. Engels to Marx. 2 March 



**[p. 142]**

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN LONDON

[London,] 24 February 1877

My dear Friend,

You would greatly oblige my wife and myself by coming to dine with us tomorrow (Sunday) at 2 o'clock. I shall then give you an explanation for my prolonged silence—throat trouble and work which, to some extent despite myself, has been thrust upon me.254

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma. Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, jogg Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

143

ENGELS TO MARX

Brighton, 2 March 1877 42 Kings Road

Dear Moor,

I have written to Liebknecht15 and asked him to send the proof-sheets to me here until further notice; I usually get them by Monday at the latest, but have had none this week and am afraid that, as usual, something's been overlooked.165 Would you be so good as to go to my house and see if any proofs have arrived there, and forward them to me? Mrs Leeson will show you what parcels of newspapers, etc., have arrived and you'll easily be able to pick them out; she can likewise give you NEWSPAPER WRAPPERS, etc., in which to pack the stuff. Otherwise the fellows are quite capable

[^1]: IN LONDON





**[p. 202]**

In some respects I'm glad that Linaa and Pumps aren't coming until the middle of the month. In the first place, we shall then be home again, as we are thinking of coming back a week on Tuesday ; secondly, it would give me time to send Lina, in addition to the £15 1 sent her in haste (all I happened to have at the time), another £5 against any eventuality, and again make it clear to her (not altogether unnecessarily, perhaps) that she should have an eye to comfortable rather than cheap travel, since all the money I have sent hitherto is, of course, intended only for the journey here.

We've had glorious weather here, but today it's misty and damp with occasional rain. How much the climate down here differs from that in London is apparent from the news item in this morning's paper which says that there was an inch and a half of ice on the water in the parks, whereas here the effect of the slight nocturnal frost had already been dissipated by the sun by ten o'clock. For a couple of weeks at the SEASIDE in winter, Brighton is indeed 'a fine place', which is why the more refined what-d'ye-call- 'ems pullulate here. But it's a disgrace to London that, after the aquarium here has attained truly scientific rank by its achieve- ments in the breeding of fish and amphibia, anyone could be presumptious enough to evoke its caricature in Westminster— MUSIC HALL with piscine accompaniment—and with such PUFFING into the bargain!

Best wishes,

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- schen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- gart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: Caroline Schöler - b 13 March



