---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "144. Marx to Engels. 3 March "
Page_Range: "232-233"
---

# 144. Marx to Engels. 3 March 



**[p. 144]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN BRIGHTON

[London,] 3 March 1877

DEAR FRED,

I am sending you the things from Leipzig I found at your house,3 together with the Plebe. As to the important declaration by the federation of Italia altab in which they state that they have always abided by the 'original Rules' of the International, and officially disassociate themselves from any actual federative link with the Italian Bakuninist groups,256 you must see that the

Vorwärts gets this as soon as possible, along with the other very interesting, and to me highly welcome, facts contained in the first letter0 you sent me.257 Otherwise Liebknecht will contrive to make nonsense of this affair too.

I've been very unwell of late, with a chronic cold, catarrh and cough.

Lavrov, who is going through a damned bad period, has praised your anti-Dühring articles, though one (i.e., he) 'is unaccustomed to such gentleness in Engels' polemics'.

You will be getting a longer missive258 from me some time next Monday'.' Do not regard this as a Diihringian manoeuvre of always making promises one never sticks to—namely doing something.

Kindest regards to Lizzy.

Your

K. Marx

Devil take Hirsch and his Castelnau. The latter has now asked me on behalf of them both to figure as a contributor to a working men's paper which they already have in hand. As if I had the time for that—and Hirsch must surely know that I haven't any! The mere fact of my name appearing, however, would make me needlessly 'responsible'. Because Mr Castelnau himself now admits

[^1]: ALL RIGHT about Lina.d

[^2]: a See previous letter. - b Northern Italy - c See this volume, pp. 198-200. - d Caroline Schöler - e 5 March



