---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "145. Engels to Friedrich Lessner. 4 March "
Page_Range: "233-234"
---

# 145. Engels to Friedrich Lessner. 4 March 

that, so long as Quest is in charge, his abrège* will belong to the Land of Nod, it seems he is going to thrash me in some other way. I have yet to see either him or Hirsch lift so much as a finger on behalf of Capital, unlike Laveleye or Block.b

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

145

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH LESSNER

IN LONDON

Brighton, 4 March 1877 42 King's Road

Dear Lessner,

This morning I got a letter from Hoffmann, 9 Hayes Court, Soho, to whom I had already sent two pounds through you. One child died before Christmas, a second on 15 February and on 25 February he lost his wife; he asks me for help, since he has not yet paid off the funeral expenses for the child and doesn't know how he can meet those for his wife, who is to be buried today, and which amount to £4. The letter (of 28 February) remained in London unattended to and hence I couldn't do anything for him in time; moreover today is Sunday when no action can be taken. Will you be so good as to call on the man and see what can be arranged and how things are with him, and if you have a pound or 30s. at your disposal you could, depending on the cir- cumstances, give it to him on my behalf, or else write and tell me straight away what you think of the matter and I can send a POST OFFICE order. Above all make it clear to the man that I didn't get his letter until this morning and was therefore unable to do anything.

I had to bring my wife here so that she could recover somewhat from her debility and this she has managed to do; she is much

[^1]: a summary (of the first volume of Capital). - b See this volume, p. 194.



