---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "146. Marx to Engels. 5 March "
Page_Range: "234-235"
---

# 146. Marx to Engels. 5 March 



**[p. 205]**

better and I trust she will remain so. We go back on Tuesday week,a and a day or two after that Pumps will also be returning, accompanied by Miss Lina Schöler.

My wife sends her warm regards to you and yours and also to Nelli, as does

Your old friend,

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 Published in English for the first time

146

MARX TO ENGELS96

IN BRIGHTON

[London,] 5 March 1877

Dühringiana enclosed.258 I found it impossible to read the fellow without belabouring him constantly and at some length.

Now, having thus familiarised myself with him (and the section from Ricardo onwards, which I've not yet read, must contain many exquisite pearls), a task that required patience and a club ready to hand, I shall in future be capable of enjoying him in tranquillity. Once one sees how the laddie's mind works, so that one really gets the hang of his method, he proves to be a fairly entertaining SCRIBBLER. Meanwhile, what with my catarrh and consequent irritability, he has done me yeoman service by providing a secondary 'occupation'.

Your

Moor

Apropos. That most virulent article on Gladstone-Novikova, the sight of which had caused the Whitehall Review to quake in its boots, appeared yesterday in Vanity Fair, with improvements by

[^1]: DEAR FRED,

[^2]: a 13 March



