---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "147. Engels to Marx. 6 March "
Page_Range: "235-236"
---

# 147. Engels to Marx. 6 March 

First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stutt- gart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time

147

ENGELS TO MARX96

IN LONDON

Brighton, 6 March 1877 42 King's Road

Dear Moor,

Very many thanks for the long opus re 'critical history'.258 It is more than I need in order to destroy the fellow utterly in this field too. In fact Lavrov is to some extent right in maintaining that the fellow has been treated too decently hitherto.c When I now re-read the Kursus der Nationalökonomie11 and knowing the fellow and his ways as I now do, so that I no longer need fear some hidden trap amidst the verbiage and can see the pompous fadaise' for what it is, I certainly consider that a little more contempt wouldn't come amiss. The good Lavrov is entitled to his own feelings about it, of course, and in his npono Blfe^bi ' can leave out of account the crescendo which the likes of us must always bear in mind when engaged on so protracted a demolition job. When I've finished the 'Philosophy', however, there'll be no further need for him to complain about gentleness, still less when it comes to the 'Political Economy'.

These are things that ought not to happen without orders from above. It would have been better to have remained silent until Gladstone was back in office and then left it to Urquhart to issue a

[^1]: Collet's grave misgivings apropos Gladstone were inevitable.8

[^2]: a Clara Collet - b Collet Dobson Collet's - c See this volume, p. 203. - d E. Dühring,

[^3]: Cursus der National- und Socialökonomie - e twaddle - ' homilies - ï See previous letter.



