---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "148. Marx to Engels. 7 March "
Page_Range: "236-239"
---

# 148. Marx to Engels. 7 March 



**[p. 207]**

grave warning by way of profound INNUENDOES incomprehensible even to the person concerned. The war against SECRET DIPLOMACY must itself be waged secretly and diplomatically.

I shall make a digest of the Plebeiana257 for Wilhelm.3 The present split in Italy spells disaster for messieurs les anarchist dictators. The brief comments in this number of the Plebe on the spiriti ristretti ed anarchici—ed alio stesso tempo mostruosa con- tradizione, dittatorialih go to show that Bignami has acquired an intimate knowledge of the peculiarities of these people. All the same, Bakunin was more skilful and patient than Mr Guillaume, who is in too much of a hurry in the matter of world government.

What you sent me wasn't a new proof.185 I've had none as yet. Wilhelm is making a thorough mess of things.

We return tomorrow week.249 Lizzy is noticeably restored, appetite almost normal; but here, on this long uninterrupted stretch of beach, the air is really incomparable.

Best wishes,

Your

F. E.

148

[London,] 7 March 1877

As I might forget to do so later, I am sending off this contribution in the wake of my last epistle258:

1. The most important point of Hume's view of the influence of an increase in money on the stimulation of industry, a point which shows more clearly than anything else (if, indeed, there had been

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA Published m English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS96

[^3]: IN BRIGHTON

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a Wilhelm Liebknecht - b minds that are narrow and anarchic and at the same time—monstrous contradiction this—dictatorial





**[p. 208]**

any room for DOUBT on this score) that he sees this increase as occurring only in conjunction with a depreciation of precious metals, a point to which Hume reverts on various occasions, as is apparent if only from the excerpt I have sent—is that 'THE PRICE OF LABOUR' rises only in the last resort, after that of all other commodities.3 Now M. Dühringb says not a word about this; indeed, Hume whom he praises so highly, is treated by him in as slovenly and superficial a fashion as all the rest. Besides, assuming he had noticed the thing, which is more than doubtful, he would have seen fit, having regard to the workers, not to praise a theory of this kind but rather TO BURKE THE WHOLE.

2. My own particular way of dealing with the Physiocrats260— i.e. as the first methodical (not, like Petty, etc., merely casual) exponents of capital and of the capitalist mode of production—was something I did not, of course, wish to put on display just yet. The fact is, IN PLAIN WORDS SAID, that my viewpoint might be taken up and simultaneously debased by charlatans before I had a chance to expound it. Which is why I did not touch on this in the exposé I sent you.

But in dealing with Diihring it might perhaps be fitting to draw attention to the following two passages in CAPITAL. I quote them from the French edition because they are less vague here than in the German original:

With reference to the Tableau Économique261: 'La reproduction annuelle est un procès très facile à saisir tant que l'on ne considère que le fonds de la production annuelle, mais tous les éléments de celle-ci doivent passer par le marché. Là les mouvements des capitaux et des revenus se croisent, s'entremêlent et se perdent dans un mouvement général de déplacement—la circulation de la richesse sociale—qui trouble la vue de l'obser- vateur et offre à l'analyse des problèmes très-compliqués. C'est le grand mérite des physiocrates d'avoir les premiers essayé de donner, dans leur tableau économique, une image de la reproduc- tion annuelle telle qu'elle sort de la circulation. Leur exposition est à beaucoup d'égards plus près de la vérité que celle de leurs successeurs'.0 (258, 259.)

[^1]: a D. Hume. Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects, Vol. I, Dublin, 1779, pp. 303- 04. - b E. Diihring, Cursus der National- und Socialökonomie - c 'Annual reproduc- tion is a process very easy to comprehend provided one considers only the funds of annual production. But all elements of the latter have to pass through the market. It is there that the movements of capital and revenue meet, intermingle and lose themselves in a general interchange—the circulation of social wealth—which confuses the eye of the beholder and presents problems of great complexity to the





**[p. 209]**

With reference to the definition of 'travail productif'*: 'Aussi l'économie politique classique -a-t-elle toujours, tantôt instinctivement, tantôt consciemment, soutenu que ce qui carac- térisait le travail productif, c'était de rendre une plus-value. Ses définitions du travail productif, changent à mesure qu'elle pousse plus avant son analyse de la plus-value. Les physiocrates, par exemple, déclarent que le travail agricole seul est productif. Et pourquoi? Parce que seul il donne une plus-value qui, pour eux, n'existe que sous la forme de la rente foncière.'15 (p. 219).

'Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of surplus value, yet this much was clear to them, viz., that it was "une richesse indépendante et disponible qu'il" (the possessor thereof) "n'a point achetée et qu'il vend"'1 (Turgot) (p. 554, Capital, 2nd German ed.), and that the same could not arise out of circulation (I.e., Capital, pp. 141-145).

I happened to be at DINNER when the GREAT Barry arrived IN GREAT HURRY with 8 newspapers under his arm.

English newspaper editors are quite extraordinary ANIMALS. The EDITOR of Vanity Fair (i.e. the subordinate one; Mr Bowles, the head and PROPRIETOR, a semi-Urquhartite, has gone to Spain with his wife for the benefit of the latter's health) had at length published the article259 from which the Scottish Morning News and the London Whitehall Review had shied away, ditto the 6 GOVERNMENTAL PAPERS, or rather the CENTRAL PRESS which is in the hands of the Tory Ministry and puts their stuff together for them.

Bon.d The same Vanity Fair MAN has, by way of revenge, now taken fright in his turn at the prospect of reprinting (in the interests of the cause and Mr Barry) the article already printed by those 8 journals, namely the one relating to Gladstone's ARTICLE IN THE Contemporary Review.262 Writes, asking Barry what to do in the event of a LIBEL action. I gave Barry—who had providently come already armed with the above-mentioned 8 PAPERS—instructions as

[^1]: analyst. It is greatly to the credit of the Physiocrats that they should have been the first to attempt to give, in their tobleau économique, a picture of annual reproduction as it is when it emerges from circulation. In many respects their exposé is closer to the truth than that of their successors.' a productive labour - b 'Indeed, classical political economy has always, whether instinctively or consciously, maintained that it was in the nature of productive labour to provide surplus value. The further it carries its analysis of surplus value, the more its definitions of productive labour change. The Physiocrats, for example, declare agricultural labour alone to be productive. And why? Because it alone provides surplus value which, for them, exists only in the form of rent.' -

[^2]: c 'independent and disposable wealth which he has not bought and which he sells' - d Very well.



