---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "149. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 16 March "
Page_Range: "239-240"
---

# 149. Marx to Pyotr Lavrov. 16 March 



**[p. 210]**

to what answer he should give. I MUST BE VERY MUCH MISTAKEN IF EVEN THIS

HESITATION (WHICH WE SHALL, HOWEVER, OVERCOME) HAS NOT SOMETHING TO DO

WITH THE 'SCRUPLES' OF M R C o L L E T . I T IS, IN FACT, TOO BAD TO TAKE THE SECRET

DIPLOMACY BUSINESS OUT OF THEIR HANDS.'

By the by, Russian diplomacy has degenerated into pure farce. Mr Ignatiyev's TOUR, whether or not it is initially successful, will still remain, no matter what the circumstances, an even more grotesque and compromising pilgrimage than that of Mr Thiers after the farrago of the 4th of September.263

From the magnanimous Gambuzzi I have received an epilogue, 9 PAGES long, of his own contriving, upon the magnanimous Fanelli,* who has just died. Presumably intended to make me repent of the insulting remarks about ejusdemh Fanelli in the piece concerning the Alliance.c 201

Your

K. M.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 , , , , Published in English in full for the first time

149

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV

[London,] 16 March 1877

My dear Friend,

A member of the HOUSE OF COMMONS (an Irishmand) intends to bring a motion—next week—to the effect that the English government should call upon the Russian government to introduce the reforms (in Russia), which it declares to be necessary in respect of Turkey. He wants to take advantage of the occasion by speaking of the horrors that are occurring inside Russia. I have

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a C. Gambuzzi, Sulla tomba di Giuseppe Fanelli. - b the same - c See K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association (see present edition, Vol. 23, p. 497). - d Keyes O'Clery



