---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "150. Marx to Mrs Wollmann. 19 March "
Page_Range: "240-242"
---

# 150. Marx to Mrs Wollmann. 19 March 



**[p. 211]**

already supplied him with a few details about the measures taken by the Russian government against the refractory Poles of the United Church. Could you make a brief résumé—in French—of judicial and police persecution inside Russia in recent years? Since time is short—I was only informed of the matter today—and something is better than nothing, could you, since these incidents are fresher in your memory than in mine, do this 'something'? I believe that would be of great service to your suffering compat- riots.264

As to Mrs Utin, I can make absolutely nothing of it, but I SHALL

CROSS-EXAMINE HER AT THE NEXT INTERVIEW. H a d s h e n o t , O n V a r i o U S occasions and in the presence of my wife and myself, expressed the wish to see you, we should not have breathed a word of it.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, , • nog Translated irom the French Published in English for the first time

150

MARX TO MRS WOLLMANN

[London,] 19 March 1877 [41 Maitland] Park Road

Dear Mrs Wollmann,

I have delayed replying in order to seek advice on so important matter from one of my friends, a former businessman.3 He returned to London only yesterday, after a long absence.

With the income you mention you can live decently in London, though only, needless to say, on a modest bourgeois basis. In fact London is today probably the cheapest capital in Europe, thus offering the advantage that, provided you keep up the usual

[^1]: IN KARLSBAD

[^2]: a Frederick Engels

[^3]: 16-406





**[p. 212]**

appearances, you can run your house in any way you wish, and that no one, not even the rich, need be unduly sociable. The city's enormous size and population relieve one of many considerations which are more or less obtrusive elsewhere. So far as education is concerned, in all the public schools—and these, even from the financial viewpoint, are the only ones I would recommend—they also have German teachers. In some respects the schools them- selves are less adequate than those in Germany, in others they are to be preferred. But in any case, and particularly for a boy who is to prepare himself for the STRUGGLE with LIFE, England is a far more useful training school than Germany, that great barracks, servants' hall and nursery.a

As regards German teachers for private tuition, there is very heavy competition among them, and so the cost of LESSONS is not high.

Here, as in America and on the European Continent, there is a business crisis which in my view has yet to reach its peak. After that point has been reached, we shall enter the most favourable period of all for the launching of new businesses. But the sooner you move to London, the longer and more leisurely will be the time available to your husband to take the preparatory steps.

I need hardly tell you that both my daughters and I welcome your move to this country as an unexpected stroke of luck.

My kindest regards to Fleckles and the dear children,

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

Should you wish to leaf through some of Capital, it would be best to start with the last section,b p. 314. In the scientific exposition the arrangement is prescribed for the author, although some other arrangement might often be more convenient and more appropriate for the reader.

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow 1981 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: a By nursery (Kinderstube) Heine called Germany in his poem 'Zur Beruhigung' (in Zeitgedichte). - b the eighth section—'Le procès d'accumulation du capital'—of the French edition of the first volume of Capital



