---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "152. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 24 March "
Page_Range: "243-244"
---

# 152. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 24 March 



**[p. 152]**

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 24 March 1877

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear old Friend,

I am sending you herewith a money-order for 50 fr. and, I think, 20 centimes and would ask you to send me in return two copies of the Geschichte der süddeutschen Mairevolution3 and, if you can, the Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne for 1876. If you can send it through a bookseller, give him the parcel addressed: F. E. care of F. Wohlauer, St. Paul's Buildings, Paternoster Row, London; in which case it will cost very little. Marx and I would like you to use the rest of the money as an additional contribution to the Précurseur.

In No. 32 of the Vorwärts there is an article of mine, 'From Italy',b from which you will have seen that the empire of Messieurs

les Bakuninists is in a truly splendid state of disintegration. The people on the Plebe deserve every support and would certainly be glad to make a reciprocal arrangement with the Précurseur. The paper's address is La Plebe, Via Carlo Alberto No. 1, Milan. The editor is called Enrico Bignami and he has maintained correspon- dence with me for years, which only became dormant when the Bakuninists' dictatorship was at its fiercest in Italy. Even Mr Malon has defected and he, after all, was one of the first seventeen International Brethren and founders of the Alliance266; one by one they are foreswearing their allegiance to the luckless Guillaume. World government is not exactly everybody's cup of tea and, as for these gentlemen's future congresses, there's every likelihood that the goings-on there will be even wilder than at The Hague.20 Our policy of mercilessly unmasking these people and then letting them rip has been gloriously vindicated. What with Belgium's turning her back on them, the defection of the last remnant in Italy, and the lamentable role they play in Switzerland (the annual shindy in Berne with the obligatory free-for-all), they have nothing left save the minuscule Spanish Alliance which only

[^1]: a J. Ph. Becker und Ch. Essellen, Geschichte der süddeutschen Mai-Revolution des Jahres 1849. - b See present edition, Vol. 24.



