---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "153. Engels to Philipp Pauli. 26 March "
Page_Range: "244-245"
---

# 153. Engels to Philipp Pauli. 26 March 

keeps going betause they have virtually no public outlet there and double-dealings are more easily conducted in the dark.

Your little piece in the Neue Welt amused me greatly.3 You ought to write a sequel; it's good for the young to be reminded about the earlier movements, otherwise they imagine that they are indebted to no one but themselves.

Your old friend,

F. Engels

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann , , . , Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first r time

153

ENGELS TO PHILIPP PAULI

IN RHEINAU

[London, 26 March 1877]

Dear Pauli,

I can't let this curious letter from Pumps go off without saying once again how very grateful my wifeb and I are to you and your wifec for all the love and kindness you have shown the girl. I hope that when your children are bigger there will at last be an opportunity of squaring the account.

When will you be coming? Schorlemmer swears black and blue that you have to visit England before the summer, but that's all we can find out, and yet it would be very nice to know, approximate- ly, when you will be turning up. Your room is ready; if you were to arrive at the end of this week, Schorlemmer could take advantage of the holidays and come too.

We spent three weeks in Brighton,249 which did my wife a power of good; she returned stronger than even after last year's long spell at the seaside and recuperative trip, and she had been remarkably low. If only it lasts until the summer.

[^1]: a J. Ph. Becker, 'Abgerissene Bilder aus meinem Leben'. - b Lizzie Burns - c Ida Pauli



