---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "156. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 11 April "
Page_Range: "246-248"
---

# 156. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 11 April 



**[p. 155]**

MARX TO PYOTR LAVROV267

IN LONDON

[London, 29 March 1877]

My dear Friend,

My best thanks for the note which I received yesterday evening. You have no idea of the pusillanimity and shilly-shallying of the 'free' English press. That is the only reason why I am not yet in a position to let you have definite news about the fate of your article.264

Yours ever,

K. M.

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, moo Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

156

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

[London,] 11 April 1877

Dear Bracke,

I am returning the first proof-sheet with this note; it will do, because the little madam," despite her evident annoyance with myself, has stuck pretty accurately to my corrections. But every now and again she makes mistakes which are a bit too much of a good thing. On p. 14 we read: 'As luck would have it, a vague

[^1]: IN BRUNSWICK

[^2]: Your title's a good one, except that, instead of 'text' you should put 'original text' or else just 'original', whichever you please.268

[^3]: a Isolde Kurz



piece of news burst open the doors.' How can a 'piece of news', and a 'vague' one at that, burst open doors? In French it's 'une

vague nouvelle', which should read: 'a fresh wave' (of people) that is!

Moreover, the translation has gone damned slowly up till now. Could you send me an approximate list of works which have appeared in Germany during recent years on the commercial and industrial crisis there118?

What your complaint chiefly calls for is a 'good' doctor. But whatever you do, don't treat the thing too lightly. Easy to cure in the early stages, the illness will become malignant if not dealt with in good time.

Engels is very dissatisfied with the way in which the Vorwärts is printing his anti-Dühring piece.186 First they forced him into doing it, and now they pay not the slightest heed to the terms of the contract. At election time,269 when no one did any reading, his articles were simply used to fill up space; next, they print short, disjointed fragments, one fragment one week, another a fortnight or three weeks later, which means that readers (working men in particular) lose the thread. Engels wrote, admonishing Lieb- knecht." He believes that this way of going about things is deliberate, that there's been intimidation by Mr Dühring's handful of supporters. It would be quite natural if the same blockheads who originally made such a song and dance about the 'deathly silencing of the hollow fool' should now wish to silence his critics. It's all very well for Mr Most to talk about the undue length of the articles. His apology for Dühring,159 luckily for him never published, was very long indeed, and if Mr Most has failed to note that there's much to be learnt from Engels' positive exposés, not only by ordinary workers and even ex-workers like himself, who suppose themselves capable of getting to know everything and pronounce on everything within the shortest possible time, but even by scientifically educated people, then I can only pity him for his lack of judgment.

With kind regards,

Yours,

K. M.

PS. Mile Kurz translates 'l'expropriation de toutes les denrées de première nécessité', which means expropriation by the government,

[^1]: a See next letter. - b expropriation of all the prime necessities



