---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "157. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 11 April "
Page_Range: "248-249"
---

# 157. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 11 April 

or public appropriation, as 'public alienation', which gives completely the wrong sense (p. 16).

Rationnement = being placed on short rations (as in a besieged fortress or on board a vessel when supplies are running out), as 'maintenance of all citizens' (p. 16). She sets down the first word that comes into her head, whether it makes sense or not.

Ditto, p. 16, she translates 'pour faire lever les provinces', as 'to levy the province'; should read 'to cause the provinces' (not 'province') 'to rise'.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 19,39 Published in English for the first time

157

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London, 11 April 1877]

Dear Liebknecht,

My letter of yesterday, which will be in Leipzig first thing tomorrow morning, will get to you on 13 Friday,15 and I expect an immediate reply to my questions. My reply to yours will depend on your reply to these, i.e. if by then there is any need at all for a reply from me.

If, by the evening of 17 Tuesday, I have had no reply, or no adequate one, from you, I shall no longer be able to show you any

[^1]: [Draft]

[^2]: I have today received your letter of the 9th. It's the same old story. First you make all kinds of promises, whereupon exactly quite the opposite happens and then, if I complain, I hear nothing from you for a fortnight and I'm told that you had too much to do and would I kindly spare you my unnecessary objurgations. IT IS ADDING INSULT TO INJURY.3 So often has this comedy been played that I refuse to tolerate another performance.

[^3]: a Phaedrus, Fables ('The Bald Man and the Fly').



