---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "160. Marx to Thomas Allsop. 20 April "
Page_Range: "250-251"
---

# 160. Marx to Thomas Allsop. 20 April 

I am truly astonished by your letter. It was at my request that you took the trouble to write—and promptly at that—not only the article published, but also the manuscript for the Member of Parliament,264 and yet you feel you are under an obligation to me! On the contrary, I am the one under an obligation.

We can discuss the Pio affair270 when you keep your promise and come and see me.

Yours ever,

Karl Marx

If they ask at the POST OFFICE for the name of the 'SENDER', you should give my name and address.

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, jogg Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

160

MARX TO THOMAS ALLSOP

[London,] 20 April 1877 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

My dear and honoured Friend,

During your last stay at London I spoke with you of Wrôblewski. He was the most able and gallant general of the Paris Commune, and even at the age of 17a years, during the time of the Polish insurrection of 1863, the leader of the insurgent Lithuanians most redoubted by the Russians. During his exile in London he has lived in a poor but respectable way by drawing military maps and doing similar work. Though brought up in the usual style of Polish noblemen, he has courageously borne with more hardship than most of the workmen exiles. It would be in the interest of our cause to procure him the means of entering the Turkish

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: => Should be: 27.



