---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "161. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 21 April "
Page_Range: "251-254"
---

# 161. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 21 April 

service now that the war with Russia is at hand,207 and all the more so that he wields great influence over his countrymen.

Myself, Engels and one or two other friends at London are willing to contribute our quota, if you and some of your friends would act in common with us. What he wants are the costs of travel and some money for dress etc. I hope that your health has been going on improving. Mrs Marx (who is rather ailing) and Tussy send their best love to you. As I do not know where to find you, I send this letter at haphazard. Old Leblanc, who will leave London for Paris, is still woefully beset by his marriage-mania.

Yours most devotedly,

Karl Marx

First published in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English) in Economies et Sociétés, No. 6, Paris, juin 1967, Série S-11

161

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE26

[London,] 21 April 1877 Dear Bracke,

Months ago, when I ceased to correspond with her, I told Miss Kurz n that, being so short of time, I could at most only undertake to correct errors of fact such as might be made by any foreigner insufficiently au fait with French conditions—but not mere mistakes in translation.

Hence, if she does not proceed more carefully (I shall spare enough time for one or two more proof-sheets), you will have to find an expert corrector and deduct what you pay him from the translator's fee.

You should devise one footnote in which you say once and for all that all notes, unless expressly stated otherwise, are Lissagaray's own. By so doing you would save the cost of having to put 'A. d. V.'* several times on every page.

[^1]: IN BRUNSWICK

[^2]: On the sheet enclosed herewith I have again noted down for your benefit the most glaring of Kurz's mistakes.194

[^3]: a Short for 'Anmerkung des Verfassers'—author's note. -



Your idea of disseminating a portrait of me taken from the caricature provided by Lachâtre27 does not appeal to me in the least."

It is to be feared that Prussia has concluded a secret treaty with Russia; without such a treaty Russia could not invade Romania.272

The workers' press concerns itself too little with the oriental question, forgetting that the government's politics gamble wantonly with the lives and money of the people.

At all events, public opinion amongst the workers, petty bourgeoisie, etc., should be duly alerted long enough in advance to make things difficult for the Prussian government (in its plans e.g. to get Russia to cede a little bit of Poland or to indemnify itself at Austria's expense), should it attempt to involve Germany in the war on Russia's behalf or so much as put pressure on Austria to that end.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

K. M.

ad p. 17, Mandat tacite, the gracious lady translates this as 'silent mandate', which is nonsense; the term 'unspoken' agreements is used in German, to be sure, but never silent ones. But in the same sentence 'démarche de Ferrières', meaning Jules Favre's journey to Ferneres, where Bismarck was, is translated as 'Ferrière's de- marche', thus changing Ferrières the place into a personl

ad p. 18, she has omitted the place-name from battle 'of Chevilly'.

ibid. 'Trochu lui fit une belle Conférence'. This she translates 'read him a fine lecture', a literal schoolroom rendering which, however, makes no sense in the German.

ad p. 20, l'Hôtel de Ville she translates as 'town house'; what is meant is the September government which was housed in the 'Hôtel de Ville'.

ibid, à ce lancé, another rendering that smacks strongly of the schoolroom: 'at this throw there came a roar from the whole rabble'. What on earth does the German mean—at this throw (which?) there came a roar, etc.? Lancé should here be translated as 'virulent cry'.

ibid. 'D'autres tocsins éclatent' is translated 'new' (why not old?) 'tocsins were pulled (!)'—What is meant is that more distress was being ventilated. The very word 'éclatent',b not to mention the

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 227. - b break out





**[p. 224]**

whole context, should have shown her what nonsense she was writing.

p. 25 Miss Kurz changed what the text calls the 'Cordeliers'275 of the old French Revolution into the latter's non-existent 'Francis- cans'. Not content with that she changes 'le prolétariat de la petite bourgeoisie'—the proletariat of the petty bourgeoisie—into 'the proletariat, the petty bourgeoisie'. Sheer carelessness, this!

ad p. 26, contre-maîtres she translates as 'senior boatswains', whereas here it means foremen, while chefs d'ateliers are captains of industry.

ad. p. 30, 'Paris capitulait avant le 15 sans l'irritation des patriotes'. Kurz translates this as 'Paris capitulated before the 15th, without exacerbation on the patriots' part', which would be correct if the original read:

'Paris capitulait etc. sans irritation de la part des patriotes' (instead of what it actually says: 'sans l'irritation des patriotes').

Hence, what is meant is precisely the opposite, namely: 'Had it not been for the exacerbation of the patriots, Paris would have capitulated before the 15th.'

What is patently at fault here—the sentence is a very simple one—is once again the most unpardonable carelessness.

ad. p. 32, 'Jules Favre demandait à Trochu sa démission'. Kurz translates this as: 'Jules Favre demanded his dismissal of Trochu.' Since a man does not dismiss himself from office, but is dismissed by his superiors, this sentence could only mean that Jules Favre wished to be dismissed from office by Trochu. In fact, however, Jules Favre demanded his (Trochu's) resignation of Trochu which is, indeed, the literal rendering of 'démission'.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, . J932 Published in English in lull tor the first time



