---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "165. Engels to Wilhelm Bracke. 24 April "
Page_Range: "256-258"
---

# 165. Engels to Wilhelm Bracke. 24 April 



**[p. 165]**

ENGELS TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

London, 24 April 1877

Dear Bracke,

It is hardly likely that you will get the photographic plate from Paris since Lachâtre is in exile and his business has been sequestrated by the government; the publishing house is being administered by an arch-reactionarya who is doing all he can to ruin it.38 For that matter, the portrait is a rotten one and Marx quite unrecognisable271; if you like, we can send you a better photograph. I shall be glad to write the biography for you. Tell me how many Kalender pages you'd like at most and at least, so that I know how much space I can take up, ditto the delivery date.275

The three stenographic reports received with thanks276; a pity your subject was not a better one; if one is constantly compelled to cite witnesses who provisionally withhold their names, one is in a poor position. But all the same, the purpose has been achieved since a favourable vote in that company is, presumably, out of the question.277 Bebel's speech is excellent—lucid, matter-of-fact and to the point.278

There was a definite agreement that an article should appear every week155; when I complained that it was not being adhered to, Liebknecht kept me waiting for ten days or more and during that time, despite his presence in Leipzig, there was no sign of rectification; finally he wrote and told me that I should spare him unnecessary objurgations—that was all, not a word about any future redress. Now, since I had no idea what influence other people might have over the editorial board, the only course open to me was to assume the above and, by means of an ultimatum, compel Liebknecht to keep his promises. I have written and told him he may, if he wishes, show the relevant letters from me to anyone he chooses, and hence, so far as I am concerned, they are at your disposal. Over here people are literally overwhelming me

[^1]: I should never have suspected any kind of Diihringian influence had Liebknecht told me the plain truth and promised me redress.b

[^2]: a Adolphe Quest - b See this volume, pp. 217-20.

[^3]: 17-406



with reproaches on the grounds that J have allowed the articles to be printed as mere stop-gaps so that no one could follow the thread. And when you consider it is now at least the sixth time that this tale has recurred, that I have been given the finest and most unequivocal promises, only to see, without fail, the very opposite happen, you will realise that in the end one grows sick of it.

So the Russians are in Bucharest.272 I trust the Turks will at once occupy all their Danubian fortresses in the locality facing the Romanian bank and turn them into bridgeheads. In particular Calafat (Vidin), Giurgevo (Rustchuk) and Calarashi (Silistria).3

That would force the Russians to lay siege to these fortresses on both banks, i.e. beleaguer them with twice the number of troops, thereby losing a great deal of time. But with every soldier the Russians have to leave behind in Romania, it will become easier for the Turks to meet them in the open field and prevent them from taking the fortresses. I likewise trust that Abdul Kerim will, as promised, send 20,000 Circassians to Romania to destroy the railways and do some thorough foraging. All honour to Straus- berg for constructing the Romanian railways with such splendid ineptitude that they are already letting the Russians down.

Re trade regulations. Cross, the Home Secretary here, has brought in a BILL whereby all the many and sometimes conflicting laws governing the limitation of working hours are to be brought together within a single act279 and thus become enforceable for the first time. I will try and get hold of the thing and send it to you or Liebknecht so that the liberal jackasses may see for once what a Conservative minister has the nerve to do in that line over here.

Time for the post and for a meal. Regards to all our friends.

Yours,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Calafat, Giurgevo and Calarashi—the Romanian names of the towns on the left bank of the Danube; Vidin, Rustchuk (Ruse) and Silistria (Silistra)—the Bulgarian names of the towns on the right bank of the Danube.



