---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "168. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 26 May "
Page_Range: "259-261"
---

# 168. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 26 May 

had come to go home, for you came over here on the off chance and not as a working man at that. You let the time go by and then approached me, a total stranger, for help. You did not produce a single document relating either to your character or your position, for a party card does not serve the purpose of vouching for its holder. Your tales about your position and acquaintances blatantly contradict what you were subsequently obliged to tell me. Finally you attempt to force me to receive you at my house by behaviour which compels me to close my doors to you.

If I nevertheless send you a postal order on GOWER STREET OFFICE for the £1 in question, I do so simply with a view to giving you one last chance to prove that you are deserving of better treatment than that which you have hitherto forced me to mete out to you. Kindly acknowledge receipt.

Faithfully

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, , , . , , . ,. , , , r. Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

168

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

[London,] 26 May 1877

Dear Bracke,

What Miss Kurz has been awaiting has today gone off from London. In the course of next week she will (save, I think, for the appendix) be getting everything in the way of alterations which Lissagaray still has to send her.194

For the rest I should like to point out that:

1. La Kurz should have sent you, as a matter of course, anything in manuscript form she had received from Lissagaray, along with her own manuscript. Considering the masterly way she translates (see just a few recent examples overleaf), how can I keep a check on her without Lissagaray's ms.? I am convinced that, because of this, all manner of infelicities have already crept in.

[^1]: IN BRUNSWICK





**[p. 231]**

2. She might very well have told herself that Lissagaray requires this ms. for his own second French edition.

All in all, the translation, when not actually wrong, is often unhelpful, philistine and wooden. But this may, perhaps, to some extent correspond to German taste. With kind regards,

Yours,

K. M.

I should be grateful if you would insist that the said Kurz should, firstly, send you (for return to Lissagaray) that part of Lissagaray's ms. she has already translated (you can pass it on to me together with the proofs) and, secondly, always enclose with her own manuscript the manuscript she has just translated so that I may compare translation and original. All in all this additional manuscript does not amount to very much.

The passage heavily scored by me on p. 73 should read thus:

'It [the people] looked for this emancipation to the autonomous Commune which,etc., etc., would conduct its administration independently, within the limits required to maintain national unity. Rather than the representative who may,etc., should, etc., it opposed to that monarchical excrescence of society, the "State", which, etc., undermines, etc., represents particular class interests which, etc., the delegation of communes endowed with a life of their own which, etc., was to administer the general national interests.'

Examples

p. 49 'A l'appel de son nom il a voulu répondre' Miss Kurz translates as: 'He wanted to respond to the summons issued to him.' Sheer rubbish! It means: 'He wished to answer when his name was called, etc'

{ditto 'les yeux brillants de foi républicaine'; foi does not here mean 'troth'—nor does it ever mean that, save in the sense of 'upon my troth!' (ma foi)—but faith, conviction, etc. I have left it as it stands since I am generally averse to all such commonplaces in German; so what matter if she puts an X for a U.}

p. 51 'des intrigants bourgeois qui couraient après la deputation'. Kurz translates 'who ran after the deputation'. A primary school child could hardly translate worse.

p. 51 'pour statuer en cas de doubles nominations' Kurz translates outrageously 'so as, if need be,' (what's that supposed to mean?) 'to decree double nominations'!!! Should read: 'so as to decide in the case of double nominations'.

