---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "170. Marx to Engels. 31 May "
Page_Range: "263-265"
---

# 170. Marx to Engels. 31 May 



**[p. 170]**

MARX T O ENGELS

IN BRIGHTON

[London,] 31 May 1877

Dear Engels,

I hope that your eyes are better. Madame Lormier, whose eye trouble got worse day by day and became really serious, was sent by Madame Longuet SENIOR a little jar of ointment (said to cost no less than 30 francs), a very small quantity of which completely cured her—mirabile dictu*—within a few days. T h e r e is no disputing that FACT. T h e ointment enjoys considerable repute in France and, by smelling, observing it, etc., you will doubtless discover what the main ingredient is.

So closely do your views on the STATE IN TURKEY agree with my own that I had said literally almost the same thing to Wroblewski.

But the crisis is not far off. Damad M a h m u d and Co. who are u n d e r the direct influence of Russia, are apparently much inclined to conclude peace with the Russians, one of the terms being, of course (as indeed recommended by The Times, in the same n u m b e r in which that paper raps Mac-Mahon over the knuckles for his anti-constitutionalismb), the abolition of the constitution. Nothing could be more opportune for the Tsar c; hitherto all that has taken place has been in the nature of a preliminary military parade; Russian victories in Asia Minor 2 8 1 have been overrated and overstated for various reasons (apart from BLOODY IGNORANCE) by the various parties; financial constraint as such is as yet in its infancy; the Caucasian malady is as yet no more than sporadic 2 8 4; for the present the Tsar might get off with a succès d'estime and without constitutional constraint, and might in his turn have an important part to play in the occidental crisis, etc., etc. Midhat Pasha, I AM TOLD, DOES EVERYTHING FROM HERE TO PUSH THE MOVEMENT AT CONSTANTINOPLE ON WHICH, IN FACT, THE FATE OF TURKEY (AND THE IMMEDIATE PROSPECTS OF RUSSIAN 'DEVELOPMENT') DEPEND.

In France we are beginning to see what I have long in vain been telling Lissagaray (who is now again taking too rosy a view), namely that the really industrial and commercial bourgeoisie is

[^1]: a marvellous to say - b 'Peace Rumours' and 'The New French Ministry', The Times, No. 28956, 31 May 1877. - c Alexander II





**[p. 235]**

becoming republican, as indeed events EVEN SINCE THIERS' RÉGIME have clearly shown, and that the 'hommes de combat'3 do not represent a particular class, but only the beaux restesh of the former parties' PROFESSIONAL POLITICIANS. The workers (in Paris) have taken for their watchword que c'est cette fois l'affaire de Messieurs les bourgeoise Hence they are holding back.

From the enclosed cutting from the Marseillaise you will see how Mac-Mahon is being treated by the radical journals. The sagacious

République Française tells him that the question can be decided only by his resignation; Emile de Girardin threatens him with IMPEACHMENT and, of all the papers, the Siècle, the épicier^ paper par excellence, treats him with the greatest ruthlessness.

Meanwhile the Bonapartists are insistent. Too late in the day to draw the sword (apart from the fact that it's not in Brogue's LINE). But (after the Chamber has been further prorogued) there might be an attempt to institute an état de siège"—illegal, it is true, but covered by the ministers' responsabilité légale* and Mac-Mahon's

irresponsabilité constitutionelle.gi 3 Such a course, which is being urged by the Bonapartists at least, might yet give rise to violent clashes. It's a possibility, if an unlikely one.

Collet, as in duty bound, has informed me of Urquhart's death. My own constitution, while not exceptionally flourishing, is pretty fair compared with what it usually is about this time of year. My wife is getting better.

The weaning of the little chaph (the Irishwoman is still with us in the meantime) has gone smoothly, but he evinces a dangerous passion for crawling up the stairs instead of round the drawing- room.

Warmest regards from one family to the other.

Your

K. M.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- schen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a fighting men - b here 'last remnants' - c that this time it's the bourgeoisie's affair - d shopkeepers' - e state of siege - f legal responsibility - S constitutional irresponsibility - h Jean Longuet



