---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "172. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 2 July "
Page_Range: "267-269"
---

# 172. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 2 July 

see a rash of Russian victories on the Danube—none of which will be of the least significance.

Kindest regards from your

F. E.

First published in Braunschweiger Volks- Printed according to the original freund, Nr. 148, 1877 ^ u . , , . _ ,. , , . . . Published in English tor the tirst time

172

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 2 July 1877

Dear Liebknecht,

You would have spared both of us a great deal of unnecessary annoyance had you at once informed me of the simple fact that the supplement would actually be appearing now, and that you were going to publish my articles in it. From your earlier letters I could only assume that the supplement could not appear before October and had, moreover, already been incorporated into the review" scheduled to come out at that time; hence I could only assume that, despite the resolution, you proposed to print the sequel to the article in the main body of the Vorwärts. Hence my many misgivings—all too justified in the event.

I have sent Ramm three articles and am today taking the precaution of writing to him again to say that he can go ahead with their publication in the supplement. A fourth article is finished and I am working on a fifth. Unfortunately there are all manner of lets and hindrances; the day after tomorrow I have to go to Manchester for a few days, and after that, my wife being unwell, to the seaside289 where, however, I shall nevertheless be able to do a few hours' work every day.

[^1]: As regards Urquhart, we have taken steps to get the material together.290

[^2]: a Die Zukunft





**[p. 239]**

The round of trials and/or sentencings seems to be getting even merrier over there.291 You ought to amend the penal code so that you can spend your nights in jug—or more precisely your prison cot—and be at large during the day.

It seems to us that the Vorwärts is taking the business in France a trifle too lightly.292 True, it's no immediate concern of the workers and they know it and say: à vous maintenant, MM. les

bourgeois, faites votre jeu!a All the same, it's of the utmost importance to future developments in France that the present lull before the next workers' movement should occur under the régime of a bourgeois republic when Gambetta & Co. would discredit themselves, rather than, as hitherto, under imperial pressure when they would regain their popularity and, on the day of action, assume the leadership again; that the squabbling over forms of government, now meaningless in France, should finally cease, and the republic appear for what it is—the classical form of bourgeois rule and simultaneously that of its impending dissolu- tion. Come to that, you'd damned well know it in Germany if reaction were to be victorious in France.293

So far all has gone well on the Danube. An oriental army like that of the Turks, unfit for use in big strategical operations, could not possibly prevent the Russians from crossing.294 But this is compensated by the fact that an oriental army of this kind is never the victim of its own stupidity. We shall now see how the Russians propose to feed their army in Bulgaria. With every step they advance their difficulties mount up in geometrical progression and the peculiar performance under fire of the best they have—the Caucasian army in Armenia—does not augur well for them. Meanwhile Montenegro is being reduced to pulp. I'm particularly glad for G. Rasch's sake.295

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Now it's up to you, Messrs bourgeois, put up your stake!



