---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "173. Engels to Marx. 15 July "
Page_Range: "269-270"
---

# 173. Engels to Marx. 15 July 



**[p. 173]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 15 July 1877 2 Adelaide Gardens

Dear Moor,

We have been installed here since Wednesday,289 but this time, alas, the effect of the sea air has not been as rapid in my wife's case as we hoped; she can't quite get her appetite back. In my case, on the other hand, the aftermath of the excursion to Manchester is already 'out of sight, out of mind'.

The enclosed letter has been forwarded to me along with one from the selfsame Wiede296 (who thus must obviously be someone other than our merry little hunchback3). Write and tell me what you say to the worthy fellow so that we proceed unisono.

The first proof of the 'Political Economy' is already here.297

Sheet 6 of the 'Philosophy', from which 29 lines were omitted, is being reprinted; let's hope there is no further unpleasantness in store.298

I still find the collapse of the Russians in Asia somewhat inexplicable. The Caucasian army has a strength of 8 divisions à

16 battalions, i.e. 128 battalions of the line (apart from riflemen, garrison troops and new formations), but Loris-Melikov is said to have only 40-50 batts in all just now. If we estimate the flying columns near Batum and Bayazid6 at a further 30 batts (certainly too high), there remain 50-60 batts TO BE ACCOUNTED FOR. These must therefore have remained in the Caucasus to cover the lines of communication. If this assumption runs counter to the vainglori- ous claims originally made by the Russians, that is no reason for rejecting it. ANYHOW the landing at Sukhum-Kaleh—whatever its real and immediate results may have been—would appear fully to have succeeded in achieving the aim of tying up almost half the Caucasian army in the Caucasus proper.

In Bulgaria the Russians are apparently feeling their way for the time being, an easy enough task thanks to the purely passive resistance of the Turks (which has reduced the Kölnische Zeitung's Prussian lieutenants to utter despair). At all events they are, it

[^1]: a Johannes Wedde - b Modern Turkish name: Dogubayazid



