---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "174. Marx to Engels. 18 July "
Page_Range: "270-272"
---

# 174. Marx to Engels. 18 July 



**[p. 241]**

seems, preparing to make a rapid thrust through the Balkans, either via Gabrovo-Kazanlyk or via Sofia-Philippopolis.a If they do so, and the Turkish government refuses to let itself be intimidated thereby, this 'most modern form of warfare' could end in disaster. To maintain three army corps in Thrace and keep them supplied with ammunition, etc., when you have no negotiable lines of communication to your rear, is a feat that may be the undoing of even the great Nikolai Nikolayevich.

The fact of the matter is that a few Europeans are necessary to the Turks. These people think in terms either of attack alone or defence alone. A combination of the two is beyond them. Like that Turkish major who said to the Kölnische Zeitung's lieutenant: You see all those Russians over there on the far side of the Danube?—Dammit, aren't your guns going to fire at them?— Yok, efendim, no Sir, but just let the Russians fire at us, and they'll see what sort of an answer we'll give them!—Meanwhile the Russians are setting up their batteries completely at their leisure. Had Silistria been defended like this in 1853, it would soon have fallen.300

Kindest regards from family to family,

Your

F. E.

174

[London,] 18 July 1877

First, as regards Wiede, I shall reply to him saying that in my present state of health I am not in a position (which is indeed the case) to interest myself in any periodical as a contributor.296

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS301

[^3]: IN RAMSGATE

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a Bulgarian name: Plovdiv





**[p. 242]**

It would certainly be very nice if a really scientific socialist periodical were to appear. This would provide an opportunity for criticism and counter-criticism in which theoretical points could be discussed by us and the total ignorance of professors and university lecturers exposed, thereby simultaneously disabusing the minds of the GENERAL PUBLIC—workers and bourgeois alike. But Wiede's periodical3 cannot be other than SHAM-SCIENTIFIC; those same semi-educated louts and semi-informed literati, who infest the

Neue Welt, Vorwärts, etc., will perforce constitute the bulk of its contributors. In such company ruthlessness—the prime require- ment in all criticism—becomes impossible; moreover, constant heed must be paid to comprehensibility, i.e. to presentation for the ignorant. Imagine a chemical periodical in which the reader's ignorance of chemistry is invariably taken for granted. And apart from all that, the way in which those who would perforce be Wiede's contributors have conducted themselves in the Dühring affair calls for the précaution of maintaining as much distance from these gentlemen as political party relations permit.302 Their motto seems to be: Anyone who criticises his adversary by abusing him is a man of sensibility; but he who abuses an adversary by genuinely criticising him is an unworthy individual.

I trust that the Russians' impudent goings-on beyond the Balkans will stir up the Turks against their old regime. The fact that the Russian defeats in European Turkey are leading straight to revolution in Russia has now been made plain even to Lavrov and Lopatin by the outbursts in the Russian press following the FAILURES in Armenia, outbursts which no censorship could have suppressed. The tone of the Petersburg newspapers is more menacing than that of the German press at the time when the siege of Paris was not proceeding as expected.13

For a few days during the past week and the early part of this one, my insomnia and a correspondingly chaotic condition of the cranial nerves assumed serious dimensions. Yesterday it started to get better again.

With kindest regards from family to family

Your

Moor

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwi- Printed according to the original sehen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: a Die Neue Gesellschaft - b This refers to the siege of Paris by the Prussians during the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71.



