---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "175. Engels to Marx. 19 July "
Page_Range: "272-273"
---

# 175. Engels to Marx. 19 July 



**[p. 175]**

ENGELS TO MARX49

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 19 July 1877 2 Adelaide Gardens Dear Moor,

I too shall write to Wiedea saying that, owing to lack of time, I can make no promises, let alone keep them. Unfortunately one cannot give the true, or rather intrinsic, reasons which you so rightly adduce. Besides—what do we know about Mr Wiede's ability to run a scientific review? Or even—on crucial occasions, of which surely there will shortly be more—about his reliability or merely his good will?

Herewith the latest from Wilhelm.b As regards the manuscript,303

all I told him in my reply was that I would send the letter to you.15

While in the cachot02 1 he actually polished off three complete articles which appear in Nos. 80 and 81 of the Vorwärts? Pitiable prevarication, a splendid example of how he would paraphrase your 'Critique of the Programme', turning it into a glorification of the same. I rebuffed his request for an article on the war, saying I had no wish to compete for space in the Vorwärts with the worthy socialists of the future, or to give further cause for clamorous protests that I fill the paper with abstruse stuff of no interest to the bulk of the readers, who evidently prefer fantasy to fact.286

It's only a pity that our people in Germany have such lamentable opponents. If there were, on the bourgeois side, just one competent man with a knowledge of economics, he would soon put these gentlemen in their places and open their eyes to their own confusion. But what can be the upshot of a battle in which the only weapons on either side are commonplaces and philistian drivel! As a counterpart in Germany to the learned bourgeois noddle, a new German vulgar socialism is evolving that is a worthy successor to the old 'true socialism' of 1845.304

The Turks will have to hurry if the affair is to turn out satisfactorily. Should they allow the Russians in Bulgaria and on

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 241. - b Wilhelm Liebknecht - c cell - d W. Liebknecht, 'Das Ketzergericht in Berlin', Vorwärts, No. 80, 11 July 1877; 'Die Rothen wider die Blauen. MI', Vorwärts, Nos. 80 and 81, 11 and 13 July 1877.

[^2]: 18-406



