---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "176. Marx to Engels. 23 July "
Page_Range: "273-277"
---

# 176. Marx to Engels. 23 July 



**[p. 244]**

the southern slopes of the Balkans to establish a quadrilateral of Russian fortresses,305 the situation might become chronic there, and in that case a thrust towards Constantinople would not be impossible, i.e. one having an eye to the purely moral effect as in 1828—or to treachery. And treachery would seem to be quite ON THE CARDS. That treachery there was at Nikopol — otherwise of no great importance after the Russian crossing—seems clear to me. Never before have 6,000 Turks, with a ditch and wall in front of them, surrendered without assault—except at Varna in 1828.306 I get quite nervous, what with the newspapers arriving twice a day and bringing news of the Russians' activity and the unfailing inaction of the Turks; it was no worse than this even in 1828 when there was no Turkish army at all.

You really ought to go and see Gumpert and get him to give you something for your insomnia; he's still there and the TRIP will do you good. Don't let the thing go too far this time—I imagine you will be going to Karlsbad again in the middle of August, and until then you have a month which you would surely do better to spend in decent health. Things aren't going too well here either.289

Since yesterday, for no apparent reason, Lizzie has been extremely unwell; the magic powers of sea-bathing have failed her for the first time and I'm beginning to get seriously alarmed.

Kindest regards to your wife, Tussy and Lenchen as well as the Longuets and Lafargues and yourself from us all.

Your

F. E.

176

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 23 July 1877

The enclosed Journal des Débats is already a bit out of date but is not without interest, notably the LEADER on the oriental war and the

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t i r o e

[^2]: IN RAMSGATE

[^3]: DEAR FRED,





**[p. 245]**

articles from Russia. Also, Volksfreund,* which seems to have become Mr Dühring's monitor. Collet's 'ENGLAND, ENEMY OF TURKEY', etc.

I had intended to pay you a two- or three-day visit in Ramsgate; a trip to see Gumpert would be pointless for I know BY HEART, both from him and from the Karlsbad doctors and professors, everything that medical science cannot do in this particular case. Besides, my insomnie is somewhat better. But un homme propose et l'autre dispose.* The other, in this instance, being Hirsch who has come to London for the express purpose of spending a week in my company. More about him and what he has told me in the course of this epistle. But tout d'abord," my plans for the immediate future.

I intend to leave shortly, if possible on 12th August, for Neuenahr307 and not for Karlsbad, and this for the following reasons:

First, because of the expense: As you know, my wife suffers from serious digestive disturbances and, since I shall in any case be taking Tussy who has had another nasty attack, my wife would take great exception to being left behind. For the three of us plus luggage—if, for the sake of the cure one travels at one's leisure as I have several times done—the journey there and back would alone amount to £70. Moreover I long ago promised Lenchen,d

who is very much run down, to convey her to her home where she cannot live completely gratis. Moreover, the family has all sorts of purchases to make for the trip.

Secondly: In unguarded moments, the Karlsbad doctors have themselves told me that, if one didn't want to visit Karlsbad every year, Neuenahr might be beneficial as an intermezzo. Of course, they would rather one always went to Karlsbad. But it might be better even from the viewpoint of hygiene to make a change for once and take less potent waters, for variatio delectat corpus." Besides, my trouble is not so much my LIVER as the nervous upset occasioned by it. Hence, less potent waters, but of essentiellement the same composition.

Furthermore, there is one important matter I have always neglected because of the expense—the after-cure. In view of the greatly reduced travelling expenses and the fact that the house will be shut up (under Withers' care) for the duration of the cure, all

[^1]: a Braunschweiger Volksfreund - h One man proposes, the other disposes. - c first of all - d Helene Demuth - e variety becomes the body (an expression traced back to Euripides' tragedy Orestes, 234).

[^2]: 18*





**[p. 246]**

these birds would be killed with one stone by exchanging Karlsbad for Neuenahr.

HENCE q.e.d. I hope you approve. Now for other matters—first of all Hirsch. He has turned out very well and has not been wasting his time. I tried him out, amongst other things, on the subject of French statistics and found him to be à la hauteur? He also gave me some very interesting information about the almost universal transforma- tion of French industrial concerns into JOINT STOCK COMPANIES. In the first place, this was facilitated by legislation in the days of the Empire. In the second, the French are not partial to business, preferring whenever possible to live as rentiers. And to which end this form of business is, of course, A GODSEND.

According to Hirsch (and here he may be taking too rosy a view) the officers of the French Army, with the exception of those at the top, are republican. However that may be, it is a FACT and a typical one, that Galliffet (the incident with la Beaumont308 really did take place, as Hirsch ascertained,according to further recherchesh) offered his services to Mr Gambetta in a letter written in his own hand, and that the self-same Galliffet, after the préfet of his garrison town had been dismissed by Broglie, called on the disgraced préfet, together with his general staff, to proffer his condolences. If these things occur in a dry tree, etc.c On the other hand, there is a widespread belief among the non-commissioned officers, largely consisting of new men, that Mac-Mahon got rid of the Chamber because it had put forward a series of proposals intended to improve the lot of non-commissioned officers.

Everything that happens at the Elysée309 daily becomes common knowledge in Paris, for the Bonapartist tapageurs6 who frequent the place cannot hold their tongues. Mac-Mahon is exceedingly embittered. The brute, whose first historic words were: J'y suis, j'y reste,'310 his second being: C'est assez, is now uttering his last one. All he says from morn till night is: 'Merde!'s

Hirsch is furious with the Vorwärts over the Dühring business as well as 'Nieder mit der Republik!'.292 He wrote an exceedingly brusque letter to the executive (Geib, etc.)111 about both these. He, too, now realises that fusion has degraded the party, both in theory and in practice.

With reference to 'Nieder mit der Republik!', he remarked that the great Hasenclever as a Prussian soldier (probably a reservist or

[^1]: a up to the mark - b researches - c Cf. Luke 23:31 - d brawlers - e Here I am, here I remain. - f That's enough - 8 Shit!



militia man) was at the gates of Paris at the time of the Commune, and hence has no reason to lay down the law in matters of principle.

He maintains that, at the time of the Prussian conflict,311

Hasenclever was editor of a progressist312 paper in Krefeld,a sold it to an ultra-reactionary, and gravely compromised himself in the course of a lawsuit arising out of the sale. This, as Bracke himself told him, was known to Bracke and Co. when they appointed Hasenclever co-editor with Liebknecht of the Vorwärts.195

Liebknecht, MEANWHILE, est puni par où il a péché. The Lassallean gang is doing everything it can to harass and humiliate him. For instance, they reproach him with the pittance he is paid by the

Vorwärts, say his wife (with five children) doesn't need a maid, etc. They have, contrary to all party and journalistic practice, deliberately so organised things that Liebknecht has to go to jug for all articles,291 even if written during his absence, thus in fact playing the same role on the Vorwärts as the man of straw on a French paper.

Next month Hirsch is leaving Paris for Berlin where he is going to take over the editorship of the lithographed party papers for a monthc and proposes to do so in such a way as to mortify the allied riffraff.

I enclose herewith a letter from the Zukunft, in case you have not also received one.313 Send it back to me for answering.

What a nice piece of cunning on the part of 'citizen', 'thinker' and 'socialist of the future' Most. So a second fusion is planned; ourselves, combined with Mr Diihring, for he'll be there without fail; at the same time, our names under the editorship of Most and Co. will mean our swallowing all their infamies in public, and most gratefully at that! In which case I would infinitely sooner have obliged Wiede.296 But I am obliged to Most for having given me the opportunity of tendering my refusal. These fellows imagine they are dealing with 'babes and sucklings'. Quelle impudence!d

I should say that the Russians have grossly miscalculated with their sabre-rattling; and when unsoldierly coups de tête" of this kind don't come off HERE AND THEN, their effect on their own army and the public is highly and miserably compromising, particularly so soon after the EXIT from Armenia.

[^1]: a Presumably Westphälische Volkszeitung. - b is reaping what he has sown (Bible, The Wisdom of Solomon 11:7). - c See this volume, pp. 252-53. - d What impudence! -

[^2]: e brain-waves



