---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "178. Marx to Engels. 25 July "
Page_Range: "279-282"
---

# 178. Marx to Engels. 25 July 



**[p. 250]**

available forces. The Turkish leadership has clearly allowed itself to be intimidated and has blundered accordingly. Moreover, it has everywhere abandoned the now ripe harvest to the Russians who therefore have enough to eat. Abdul Kerim has allowed the Turkish army to run so much to seed that more than 20% are in hospital, while the Kölnische Zeitung's Prussian lieutenant says that in Shumla he saw crowds of Turkish officers (not men) drunk on spirits. And all as a result of inaction. It drives one wild to see such a magnificent position and such splendid fighting material go to waste like this. All the same the Russians won't get to Constantinople, nor will they find it so easy to deny even the Turks in the quadrilateral of fortresses305 their supplies of food. Moreover, they have only two months left in which to force a decision and hence, despite all the follies of the Turks, this year's campaign has already as good as failed—were unpredictability not the rule out there! The despatch of British troops will probably be enough to prevent the Sultan3 from concluding a separate peace, and that's what's good about it.

Lizzie is doing better. She went through a serious crisis on Sundayb and now seems to be gradually recovering.

Best wishes to everyone,

Your

F. E.

178

[London,] 25 July 1877 DEAR FRED,

Another word about Neuenahr.307 If one keeps going uninter- mittently to Karlsbad, one is forever staking one's last card. If,

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, . . . . . . . . Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 time

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS145

[^3]: IN RAMSGATE

[^4]: Best thanks for the billet doux.c

[^5]: a Abdul Hamid II - b 22 July - c love letter (see previous letter)





**[p. 251]**

however, one has recourse to a less potent spa, there will always be a last resort should things take a turn for the worse. And one has to treat one's physique with as much diplomacy as everything else.

Herewith, ditto, an excerpt from Geib's letters to Hirsch. Hirsch regrets not having Liebknecht's letters with him because, he says, we should see from them that Liebknecht has been agitating vigorously against the Dühring clique for months. Liebknecht, it would seem, has to swallow a great deal of trouble which he conceals from us.

What do you think of the workers of the UNITED STATES? This, the first outbreak against the ASSOCIATED CAPITAL oligarchy that has arisen since the CIVIL WAR, will, of course, be suppressed, but may well provide a point of departure for the constitution of a serious workers' party in the UNITED STATES. There are two favourable circumstances on top of that. The policy of the new President3 will turn the negroes, just as the big expropriations of land (EXACTLY OF THE FERTILE LAND) for the benefit of the RAILWAY, MINING, etc. companies will turn the peasants of the West—whose grumbling is already plainly audible—into militant allies of the workers. So there's a pretty fair storm brewing over there, and the transfer of the centre of the International to the UNITED STATES317 may yet, post festum,h be presented with a quite exceptional opportunity.

You will recall that Challemel (I don't know how the name is spelt) de Lacourc wrote a caustic, perfectly insulting anti-Mac- Mahon article in the République Française in which, inter alia, he spoke of the 'blessure opportune',d failing which he [Mac-Mahon] would have been relegated to the same gloire-listee as the Frossards, Faillys, etc. Thereupon notification was given in the official papers that the République was to be prosecuted for this libellous article. But it wasn't and, as Hirsch says, for the following reason: the famous Stoffel, mortal enemy of Mac-Mahon who dismissed him from the army and with whom he had a tremendous row during Bazaine's trial,47 called on Gambetta and offered, should the trial proceed, to give evidence about Mac- Mahon's EXPLOITS during the battle of Sedan.113 This soon became known in the Elysée30 and the prosecution was dropped.

Ad vocemc Broglie. As you know, he had discharged his debts in the first ordre moral government318 but now once more found himself in difficulties, of which the whole of Paris was aware. He was waiting for the death of a very old and frail relative (stinking

[^1]: a Rutherford Birchard Hayes - b after the event - c Paul Armand Challemel- Lacour - d timely wound - e honours list - f As to



rich) in Switzerland, a Mrs von Staël (a relative of the famous VIRAGO3). This person died on 13 March 1877, leaving h e r whole fortune to a lady a n d — n o t a FARTHING to Brogue. W h e r e u p o n , like Dolleschall, h e said: 'Now it's a question of daily bread. Now I have nothing to count on!'

Your reply to the Berliners13 would be seasonable. T h e fellows must be made to feel that, if one is long-ENDURi NG, one is also capable of digging one's heels in.

I shall see whether the TRIP with Hirsch can be arranged. c Today he is at the Crystal Palace,319 which means that I'm unlikely to see him until tomorrow afternoon (since he writes his articles for the Vossische,d etc., in the mornings).

Salut.

Your

Moor

Sample of the 'great perspicacity' of the armchair socialists:

'Not even great perspicacity such as is at the command of Marx is able to solve the task of "reducing use values'" (the idiot forgets that the subject under discussion is 'commodities') 'i.e. vehicles for enjoyment, etc., to their opposite, to amounts of effort, to sacrifices etc' (The idiot believes that in equalising values I wish to 'reduce' use values to value.) 'That is to substitute a foreign element. The equation of disparate use values is only explicable by the reduction of the same to a common factor of use value.' (Why not simply to—weight?)

[^1]: T h u s dixit' Mr Knies, the critical genius of professorial political economy.

[^2]: Excerpts from letters from Geib to Hirsch.

[^3]: 1. Hamburg, dated 3.6.77 (Concerning the founding of the reviews): 'A comrade, Karl Höchberg, in Berlin' (in Hirsch's view a 'comrade' of the ILLUSTRIOUS Eugen Dühring), 'native of Frankfurt am Main, has undertaken to make the party an annual gift of 10,000 marks for literary purposes. Having thus been made independent, we resolved at Gotha to publish, as from 1 October, not only the Review but also a Social-Democratic news-letter—autographed—such as we had privately discussed the previous year at Gotha. You immediately sprang to mind as editor of both papers. The review is to come out twice a month and the news-letter two or three times; six times while the Reichstag is in session, etc.

[^4]: 'Höchberg, who has a degree and is about thirty years old, will help as required with the editing of the Review, but will not have any administrative say in it. The editor of both undertakings is to have an annual salary of 3,000 marks Everyone I have asked so far is agreed that the editing could be entrusted to no better hands than yours.'

[^5]: a Anne Louise Germaine de Staël - b i.e. to the Zukunft editorial board (see previous letter) - c to Engels in Ramsgate (see previous letter) - d Vossische Zeitung - e saith

[^6]: - f C. Knies, Geld und Credit, Part I: 'Das Geld', Berlin, 1873, p. 119. - S Die Zukunft



