---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "179. Engels to Franz Wiede. 25 July "
Page_Range: "282-283"
---

# 179. Engels to Franz Wiede. 25 July 



**[p. 253]**

2. Hamburg, 5.7.77: 'The review will come out as from 1 October Höchberg, who will probably approach you direct, will assist you with the editing of the review. This I envisage as follows: You either hand over to him, or make some arrangement with him about, certain departments which he is to administer, such as, e.g., philosophy, history, natural science. New books in this sphere will be discussed by Höchberg If it transpires that you have to devote your entire attention to the news-letter, it will be easy to make some other arrangement. In this connection I would mention Dr Wiede, who is a keen party member, speaks and writes French, English and Italian, has travelled widely and was himself proposing to publish a socialist review in Zurich.3 When he was here recently I dissuaded him from carrying out his plan, etc' (but to no effect!)

3. Hamburg, 18.7.77. 'You have definitely accepted so far as the news-letter is concerned' (i.e. Hirsch proposes to try the thing out for a month in August). 'We have still not settled anything definite in respect of the review. As you have refused, we have latterly been engaged in verbal negotiations here with Höchberg. Here we had to consider the circumstances that the Leipzigers are all, to a man, opposed to the review's editorial board being composed solely of newcomers to the party. Everyone likes Höchberg well enough, but not Wiede. It is feared that a weak editorial board—and an unknown one might ultimately turn out to be weak—in Berlin might easily be led into Dühringian channels, thus sowing the seeds of fatal dissension within the party. Not that I myself take such a gloomy view of it, though in one respect I agree with all the rest, namely that in the first quarter the review must be co-edited and signed—in other words, launched—by a lettered man, a comrade known to the whole party. I believe that you could do this quite well' (whereupon, however, Hirsch declares that he won't do it).

179

ENGELS TO FRANZ WIEDE

Dear Sir,

[Ramsgate, 25 July 1877]

Pray excuse me for, etc. Now, as regards my collaboration on your projected journal,3 I can, unfortunately, promise you nothing definite at the moment.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen Printed according to the original F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, . . . JQJO Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: IN ZURICH

[^3]: [Draft]

[^4]: Die Neue Gesellschaft



