---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "180. Engels to Marx. 31 July "
Page_Range: "283-285"
---

# 180. Engels to Marx. 31 July 



**[p. 254]**

As soon as I have completed my critique of Diihring for the

Vorwärts,155 I shall be obliged to concentrate my whole attention on a longer, independent work16 which I have had in mind for years, one of the obstacles to its completion hitherto—aside from extraneous circumstances—having been my collaboration on socialist organs. When a man has totted up 56 years, he must finally make up his mind to take stock of his time so that something may finally come of his preliminary labours. Should an isolated case occur in which I again deemed it necessary to cast my vote in public, it would depend on the circumstances where this should be done, whether in the Vorwärts or elsewhere, and in this latter case I should, among all the various 'scientific journals' now being projected, be happy, in so far as I can now predict, to turn to yours first. If, therefore, I feel unable to make any firmer promise today, I would beg you to ascribe this solely to the reasons adduced above, and in no way to a want of sympathy for a journal which greatly interests me, to which I wish all prosperity and to which I have already subscribed through my bookseller.

I am, Sir, etc.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, JQ32 Published in English for the first time

180

[Ramsgate,] 31 July 1877 2 Adelaide Gardens

Dear Moor,

Just a couple of lines in great haste enclosing letter from W. Liebknecht which might perhaps influence your reply to the Zukunft321 I haven't yet sent a straight answer, but have written to Liebknecht about the oddity of expecting us to entrust our manuscripts to totally anonymous persons because a congress has conferred a scientific character on them.3'4 I further told him that

[^1]: ENGELS TO MARX320

[^2]: IN LONDON





**[p. 255]**

I would write articles only in exceptional cases and when I myself considered it imperative.3

Wilhelm himself obviously doesn't know how things stand— otherwise he couldn't have made such a howler about Wiede. A fine way of setting up a scientific journal! Anyhow, it's a good thing there isn't any Dühringianism.

I was delighted by the business of the strike in America.316 The way they throw themselves into the movement has no equivalent on this side of the ocean. Only twelve years since slavery was abolished and already the movement has got to such a pitch!

Kniesh is capital. Dühring, too, concerning whom you have again hit the nail on the head. What he ultimately says, in fact,— translated from confusion into economics — is that value is determined by wages.c

Doubtless one will have to resign oneself to the Russians remaining between the Balkans and the Danube until the autumn. The Turks have allowed a very large proportion of their regular troops to succumb for want of proper provisioning during the fighting in Serbia and Montenegro,17 and Abdul Kerim has done his best to finish off the rest. I doubt whether Mehemet Ali has more than 50,000 men capable of an offensive; Osman Pasha will have some 25,000 and another 25,000 south of the Balkans; that would seem to be all, the remainder being untrained militia of no use in the field. Provided the Turkish government doesn't now conclude a premature peace, the Russians will not get to Constantinople this year, but probably cross the Danube again in November and, not having yet made any impression on the fortresses which—barring accidents—are therefore likely to con- tinue secure throughout this campaign, they can start from the beginning again in the spring—if at all.

The wretched Standard correspondent in Constantinople is, at Layard's behest, disseminating alarmist rumours in order that the English fleet may be imposed on the Turks.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 257-580. - b C. Knies, Geld und Credit. Part I: 'Das Geld'. - c E. Dühring, Cursus der National- und Socialökonomie, Leipzig, 1876, p. 27.



