---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "182. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 31 July "
Page_Range: "285-287"
---

# 182. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht. 31 July 



**[p. 181]**

ENGELS TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

Ramsgate, 31 July 1877 2 Adelaide Gardens Dear Mrs Liebknecht,

May I request you to arrange at your convenience for this note3

to reach your husband safely? With any luck you will shortly be relieved of labours of this kind and, I hope, for some considerable time.322 The wives of our friends in Germany have to play their part in the struggle which their husbands are actively waging, and to play it in a manner which would come as a surprise to our wives here, in the security of England. It's all very well for us here to talk and criticise, when in Germany any thoughtless or ill-considered word may entail imprisonment and the temporary disruption of family life. Fortunately our German women do not allow themselves to be deterred by this and prove by their deeds that the sickly sentimentality of which one hears so much is just a class affliction peculiar to bourgeois women.

With warm regards to you and your children,

Yours very sincerely,

F. Engels

182

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

Ramsgate, 31 July 1877 2 Adelaide Gardens Dear Liebknecht,

Have received your two letters of 21 and 28. I can only hope that the Dühringian fiasco is over for good and that things won't

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, , ,. , , . _ ,. , . , ,. JQOQ Published in English lor the hrst time

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: a See next letter.



be patched up again. The fact remains that those party organs which allowed themselves to be misled into according him scientific importance simply because of his harassment by the Prussians (!) have made asses of themselves. And that means all the ones I have seen.287

Vahlteich certainly made the remark about Marxians and Dühringians; immediately after the congress it appeared in all the papers that published his speech at the public meeting (where it was perpetrated).323 Nor do I think he would repudiate it. The fact that he is now doing time seems to me no reason for making him out to be better than he is.

Elisée Reclus is a mere compiler and nothing more. Since he and his brother3 were co-founders of the secret Alliance,201

he could, if he would, give you more inside information than you could give him. Whether or not he belongs to your little lot makes no difference at all; politically he is muddle-headed and impotent.

I never said that the bulk of your people didn't want real science. I was speaking15 of the party, and that's whatever it makes itself out to be before the public, in the press and at congresses. And there the order of the day is semi-literacy and your ex-worker dolling himself up as a man of letters. If, as you say, these people amount to no more than a tiny minority, then obviously the only reason you and the others have to pay any heed to them is that each of them has his supporters. The moral and intellectual decline of the party dates from the unification71 and could have been avoided had a little more caution and intelligence been shown at the time. Much can ultimately be sweated out by a healthy party, but it is a long and arduous process and the health of the masses is certainly not an adequate reason for injecting them unnecessarily with a disease.

As regards the Zukunft, it's lucky that your letter reached me in time to prevent my sending the reply I had already decided to make to the invitation that I should contribute.321 An invitation from completely anonymous editors who can proffer no better scientific credentials than a resolution in congress, as though a congress could confer a scientific character upon anything!314

What presumption, that we should entrust our manuscripts to completely anonymous people who might very well be the most arrant Dühringians!

You say that Wiede is a co-editor. But as recently as the 20th

[^1]: a Michel Élie Reclus



