---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "183. Marx to Engels. 1 August "
Page_Range: "287-291"
---

# 183. Marx to Engels. 1 August 



**[p. 258]**

inst.a he himself invited me to work for a reviewb he was proposing to found in Zurich]

In short, I am sick of this muddle, this perpetual embarking on hare-brained and over-precipitate schemes. If only because of the necessity of my now finishing off, at long last, my own, lengthier works, I cannot at present enter into any agreements whatsoever. I shall complete the 'Dühring',155 after which I shall write articles only when I myself consider it to be imperative and, were there to be a journal that was not a party organ, I would choose it for preference rather than remain at the mercy of congressional debates.286 When all is said and done, there is no democratic forum for scientific works, and I don't want a repetition of my earlier experience.

You ought to go to Ghent324 and come on to London from there; we certainly shan't be going to Ghent, otherwise why should we have withdrawn from practical participation at The Hague20? You would be able to reach London quickly and very cheaply via Antwerp, and there'll always be a room ready for you at my house.

I have got to close as the table is being laid.

Your

F. E.

183

[London,] 1 August 1877

Herewith letter from Höchberg to Hirsch who went back to Paris on Saturday.0 Kindly return the letter after reading it, as I have got to let Hirsch have it back.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, „ , , . , , . ,• , r , r- 19,32 Published in English for the rirst

[^2]: MARX TO ENGELS52

[^3]: IN RAMSGATE

[^4]: DEAR FRED,

[^5]: a A mistake: Wiede wrote to Engels on 10 July 1877. - b Die Neue Gesellschaft (see this volume, pp. 253-54). - c 28 July





**[p. 259]**

Höchberg's letter, I believe, gives a better idea of the man than anything that Liebknecht says (the latter again distinguishing himself by recommending addle-pated Acollas and that faiseur* Lacroix) or might say about him. Höchberg is the first man to buy his way into the party—with the best of intentions as I think—and seek to reshape it in his image. Evidently he has little if any knowledge of the personal standing of party members and writers 'abroad', whom he proposes to gather about him as an 'interna- tional' group. He takes au sérieux* the worthy B. Malon who was rejected even by the Liberté belgec as a superficial hack. As regards

Elisée Reclus, the Protestant pastor's son, he should at least have known that he and his brother Polluxd are the 'souls' (to use the words of one who formerly inspired our Neue Rheinische Zeitung325) of the Swiss journal Le Travailleur326 (other con- tributors being Zhukovsky, Lefrançais, Razoua et tutti quantie) wherein, if in a more jesuitically refined form than is at the unfortunate Guillaume's command, war without quarter is being waged against the German workers' movement, its leaders in particular (not, of course, that Liebknecht, etc., are named) being denounced as people who—do nothing at the workers' expense, but rather hamper the movement and sap the strength of the proletariat in mock fighting and parliamentary intrigues. And in gratitude for this, Höchberg proposes to invite his collaboration from Berlin.

That cheery little hunchback Wedde TURNED UP a few days since, only to disappear to Germany again a short while after. He had an urgent mandate from Geib, namely to recruit you and me for the Zukunft313 Much to his chagrin, I made absolutely no secret either of our intention to abstain, or of the reasons for it, and at the same time intimated that, should time and circumstances again permit propagandist activity on our part, we would, as internation- als, in no way feel bound by duty or sentiment to associate ourselves with Germany, our beloved fatherland.'

In Hamburg he had seen Dr Höchberg and ditto Wiede; the latter, he thought, had more than a touch of your Berliner's flippancy and arrogance; the former he liked, though finding him still very much prone to 'modern mythology'. For during the little chap's (Wedde's) first visit to London, I used the expression 'modern mythology' to describe the renewed ascendancy of the

[^1]: a humbug - b in earnest - c Belgian Liberté - A Michel Élie Reclus (an ironical comparison of Elisée and Élie Reclus with the twin brothers Castor and Pollux. - e all the rest - f Cf. F. von Schiller's drama Wilhelm Tell, Act II, Scene 1.

[^2]: 19-406





**[p. 260]**

goddesses of 'Justice, Liberty, Equality', etc., and this made a profound impression on one who had himself done much in the service of these superior beings. Höchberg seemed to him to be tainted with Dühringianism, and he has a sharper nose than Liebknecht.

You will have received the Mehring.3 Today I am also sending you a little anti-Treitschke pamphletb which, while most boringly and superficially written, nevertheless has some points of interest.

The main trouble with Turkey is—the old story with all absolute monarchies. The Seraglio party—which is also Russian, just as the parties of Charles I, Charles II, James II, Louis XVI and Frederick William IV all sought to keep themselves going by recourse to foreign intrigue—is giving way but is far from being broken. In the first moment of alarm Abdul Kerim and Redif were summoned before a court martial. Mahmud Damad was disgraced, Midhat Pasha invited to return. Scarcely was the first panique over when Damad was again at the helm, protecting his trusties and keeping Midhat at arm's length, etc. I am convinced that the Muscovite diplomats are following the moves in Constantinople more attentively than those on either side of the Balkans.

Apropos 'value' in the first0 (most inadequate, even wholly erroneous, but not uninteresting) chapter of his Teopin Koneöauin

ifèwad on 'Value', having passed under review all the epigonic musings of contemporary German, French and English scholastics, Kaufman makes the following, absolutely correct commente:

That is, indeed, the hallmark of all vulgar political economy. Adam Smith began it; his few profound and surprising applica-

[^1]: .'In our review of the doctrines of value we saw that the political economists had certainly grasped the importance of this category All the same everyone who occupies himself with economic science is familiar with the fact that in figures of speech the importance of value is raised to the extreme, but in actual fact is forgotten as quickly as possible, as soon as there has more or less been some mention of it in the introduction; it is impossible to give even a single example where what is said about value is to be found organically linked to what is said about other matters, where what is said about value in the introduction has any influence at all on the subsequent arguments. I refer here, of course, only to the pure category "value", as distinct from price.'f

[^2]: a F. Mehring, Zur Geschichte der deutschen Sozialdemokratie. - b [F. Mehring,] Herr von Treitschke der Sozialistentödter und die Endziele des Liberalismus. - c A slip of the pen; should read: 'second'. - d Theory of Price Fluctuation - e Marx gives a free rendering of Kaufman's text; italics by Marx. - f [Kaufman] H. VL. Kay<j>Ma Hi>, Teopin Konebanin ut H-b, Kharkov, 1867, p. 123.





**[p. 261]**

tions of the theory of value are found in haphazard remarks which have n o bearing whatever on his exposés ex professo. Ricardo's great transgression which, from the start, made him impossible to swallow, was precisely his attempt to prove the correctness of his theory of value in the light of economic facts which seemed wholly to contradict it.

My good nephews 3 yesterday did me the honour of presenting me with the five fat volumes of Bancroft's The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America. T h e book, published by Longmans, came as a godsend to them, since all they had to d o was p u t it down to their old man's b account at Longmans.

I have h a d a very nice reply from Dr Wiede to my letter of EXCUSE0

As for the Zukunft, I shall not answer at all, CONSIDERING THAT AN

ANONYMOUS CIRCULAR, SIGNED BY NOBODY, IS FROM ITS VERY NATURE—UNANSWERABLE

AND NOT TO BE ANSWERED.

T h e Irish skirmishing in the HOUSE OF COMMONS is most amusing. Parnell, etc., told Barry that the worst thing was the attitude of Butt who, with an eye to being appointed judge, threatened to resign his position as LEADER. H e might, they said, do them a great deal of h a r m in Ireland. Barry mentioned BUTTS LETTER TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE INTERNATIONAL,327 a document they would like to have so as to prove that his inflexibility towards the intransigents was only put on; but where should I find the thing now?

Salut.

Your

Moor

[^1]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, „ , , , , • ^ ,• , • ,• „ r Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 h r s t t l m e

[^2]: Henry and Charles Juta - b Johann Carl Juta - c See this volume, p. 241.



