---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "185. Marx to Engels. 8 August "
Page_Range: "291-294"
---

# 185. Marx to Engels. 8 August 



**[p. 184]**

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

[London,] 1 August 1877

Dear Bracke,

I shall be leaving London at the end of this week or the beginning of next and going to the Continent since my state of health necessitates my taking a cure.307 In the meantime I have been forbidden work of any kind and you will therefore have to look elsewhere for someone to revise the translation of Lis- sagaray's book,194 since without revision the thing's unprintable. (C. Hirsch might be able to suggest someone to you.)

Needless to say, Lissagaray finds the month's hiatus, during which you have failed to communicate with him, far from edifying and I consider his grievance to be fully justified.

Yours very sincerely,

K. M.

185

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 8 August 1877

It was not possible for me to find Owen's stuff (or for that matter Fourier's Fausse industrie) in the attic since everything up

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, _ ,,. , , . _ ,. , , • goo Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN RAMSGATE

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: Still no news from the Longuets, which is all the more awkward in that we are leaving today (this evening).307

[^5]: Herewith the Tableau économique261 together with a few marginal notes.328



there (it also does duty as Carry's bedroom, and the ladies have arrayed all their trunks there, to be packed with what is indispensable for the journey) is in the utmost confusion.

Ad vocem* Owen. Sargant's workb would be easily obtainable; of greater importance and unobtainable is the little pamphlet ON PRIVATE MARRIAGES.0 The two stout tomesd which Jennychen has got were definitely not at her house; I went through everything there; perhaps Longuet took them away with him. If the worst comes to the worst, all Owen's works could probably be obtained from OLD Allsop. MEANWHILE I have found here at home a very important work of Owen's in which he gives a résumé of his entire doctrine. The Revolution in the Mind and Practice of the Human Race, 1849. I had forgotten all about it. I shall take this to your house today, together with Fourier's Théorie des quatre mouvements and Nouveau Monde industriel, and Hubbard's piece on Saint-Simon.e 329

My wife is in a far from satisfactory state of health. I hope Madame Lizzy is improving; with any luck she will soon be able to begin bathing in the sea which has, after all, always helped her hitherto. We all send her our best wishes.

And now, OLD BOY, au revoir. The damned Prussians can't stop bickering and the bogus old N.C.O.£ will do his utmost to push Francis Joseph into perpetrating some stupidity. All the latter needs now is a Hungarian revolution.

The Constantinople correspondent of the République Française writes that an intrigue of Mahmud Damad's has led to the deposition of the old Sheikh-al-Islam3S0 because of his revolution- ary opinions, and his replacement by some other jackass.g He believes that, unless the palace intrigues cease very soon, Constantinople is in for a tumultuous time.

Adio.

Your

So much for Quesnay's Tableau! Sub I a) avances annuelles des fermiers,*1 paid out by the same; replaced by product of 5 milliards, of which 2 milliards (alv),

[^1]: Moor331

[^2]: a As for - b W. L. Sargant, Robert Owen, and His Social Philosophy. - c Presumably R. Owen. The Marriage System of the New Moral World. - d Probably [R. Owen,] The Life of Robert Owen, Vol. I and A Supplementary Appendix to the First Volume of The Life of Robert Owen, Vol. I. A. - e G. Hubbard, Saint-Simon, sa vie et ses travaux. - l William I - « Hassan Cheirullah was replaced by Kara Chalil - h farmers' annual advances





**[p. 264]**

the replacement in natura of the said avances annuelles, are spent by the Classe Productive (fermiers a n d their ouvriers*) in the course of the following year, i.e. the year beginning with the new harvest.

T h e avances primitivesh of 10 milliards do not figure in the Tableau, but are presupposed, just as it is further presupposed that the farmers have paid 2 milliards in money as rents to REVENUE (LANDLORDS, CHURCH AND STATE) before the circulation depicted in the Tableau begins. Besides the replacement of the avances annuelles of 2 milliards in natura, the gross product provides a further 3 milliards of which 2 in vivres? 1 in matières premièresd for industry. These 3 milliards u n d e r a', a", a'" are SURPLUS PRODUCE of which, however, only 2/s counts as NET PRODUCE, produit net or REVENUE because V3, (IN FACT, the farmers' profit), forms the interest produced in natura for the avances primitives of 10 milliards. Sub III c) avances of the classe stérilee of 1 milliard consist solely of raw materials (see my previous exposition258); expended in the course of the year ending with the last harvest. Are replaced by industrial goods (c' and c") to the value of 2 milliards; of which / milliard = value of matières premières, 1 milliard= value of means of subsistence, which the classe stérile has received as salaire1 from the other two classes in return for its labour.

Now for the mouvement depicted in the Tableau: 1. b — a'. LANDLORDS (inch church, state) buy vivres for 1 milliard from fermiers; thus V2 the money they paid for RENT OF LAND returns to them.

3. a—c". Farmers buy industrial products for 1 milliard from classe stérile (details in previous exposition). T h e line runs from a to c" and from c" back to a, so as to indicate that the greater portion of this expenditure by the farmers is capitalised, i.e. serves to maintain and enrich elements of the avances annuelles and primitives.

4. c — a". Classe stérile buys from classe productive raw materials for 1 milliard and thus replaces its avances for the coming year, IN FACT, its productive capital. T h u s 1 milliard in money flows back to

[^1]: 2. b—c'—a'". LANDLORDS buy industrial goods for 1 milliard from classe stérile, the latter, for that same milliard, means of subsistence from classe productive; thus, the second half of the money, which it has paid for RENT OF LAND, returns to it.

[^2]: a productive class (farmers and their labourers) - b original advances - c means of subsistence - d raw materials - e advances of the sterile class - f wage



