---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "186. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 8 August "
Page_Range: "294-295"
---

# 186. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 8 August 

the farmers and they again find themselves in possession of the 2 milliards in money which constitute the nation's pécule3 and which they put back into circulation primarily via the LANDLORDS (in payment of rent). The circulation of money within each individual class is excluded from the Tableau, and rightly so.

Bearing in mind the time of its publication, the whole thing is one of the most brilliant generalisations political economy has ever produced.

The exposé I originally gave you is based on the Tableau somewhat modified, with Quesnay's consent, by Abbé Baudeau in Explication du Tableau économique. The line a—c" had given rise to misunderstandings. Similarly, in Baudeau's case, the mouvement does not start from b (LANDLORDS) but from a' (farmers), inasmuch as payment of monetary rent is not assumed to have been made. This and sundry other details in no way alter the case.

On the whole I think you would be well-advised to use the Tableau solely for your own guidance, but to confine yourself solely to words when describing the various very simple movements for the Vorwärts. If the Tableau itself were reproduced, it would be necessary to go into small, inessential details, which would confuse people rather than enlighten them.

186

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

London, 8 August 1877 Dear Bracke,

Your letter received. I leave today.307 You will be getting a letter from me in a few days' time (perhaps even in two) directed to Ems poste restante.

[^1]: First published (without the table) in Der Printed according to the original Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und _ , ,. , , . „ ,. , , K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in Published in English for the first full in Marx/Engels, Werke, Bd. 34, Ber- t l m e

[^2]: lin, 1966

[^3]: IN BRUNSWICK

[^4]: * stock of money



