---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "187. Marx to Maltman Barry. 15 August "
Page_Range: "295-296"
---

# 187. Marx to Maltman Barry. 15 August 

Engels cannot be of service to you3S2; he is at a seaside resort and will shortly be moving on, possibly to Jersey or the Isle of Man or elsewhere.333 Such little time for work as he has at his disposal is, moreover,— under present circumstances—wholly spoken for.

As regards B. Becker, I must say that I am totally opposed to his being entrusted in any way with Lissagaray's work194 In Paris he abused me and Engels—not to speak of yourself—in no uncertain terms and now in London (where he has been for the past two months) has taken great care to keep out of my sight. His fury—as I had already heard from Paris—was due solely to your publishing Lissagaray's work! His insults and intrigues are a matter of complete indifference to me, but I cannot under any circumstances permit this individual to be mixed up in anything that has to do with Lissagaray.

As for Isolde,3 she seems to know more about extortion than translation.

Yours,

K. M.

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, . ig32 Published in English for the first time

187

MARX TO MALTMAN BARRY

[Neuenahr,] 15 August 1877

Dear Barry,

My address is: Dr K. Marx, Hotel Flora, Neuenahr, Rhenish Prussia. Neuenahr is the name of the village, this watering place not pretending to the dignity even of a market town. It is quite separated from the outer world; no railways within the boundaries of the valley of the Ahr.

I have seen from the Times—in the reading room of the

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a Isolde Kurz



