---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "194. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 September "
Page_Range: "304-308"
---

# 194. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 27 September 

will be back at any rate by the middle of September, though I can't say what day.

I do indeed share your view that Liebknecht spends too much time sitting down291; it may be as well not to make a fuss about such things, but that doesn't mean one should accustom oneself to .a sedentary way of life. Whether you can wean him away from service in the front line (or rather the avant-garde) is, I should say, somewhat doubtful; anyone who has spent so many years in that service derives too much pleasure from it; however, by long practice he will soon reach the stage of eluding the toils of the penal system. Doubtless, however, you could wish nothing better than that Liebknecht should not continue to spend in prison such time as he is not on duty and all such time as he is not in prison either in the Reichstag or on his travels.

My wife most cordially reciprocates your amiable sentiments. With warmest regards,

Yours,

F. Engels

Since I do not know whether Liebknecht is with you, might I request you to be so kind as to convey the contents of this letter to him.

194

London, 27 September 1877 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. Dear Friend,

Unfortunately it is not till now, on my return from the Continent (whither I had been sent by the doctors),807 that I have found your letter. Hence my answer may perhaps arrive much too late. As for the rest, Pater peccavial But the damned insomnia

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, „ • , - , . , • ^ ,• , r L <•• ,qon Published m English for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE52

[^3]: IN H O B O K E N "

[^4]: a Father, I have sinned (Luke 15:18).

[^5]: 20-406





**[p. 276]**

which has afflicted me this year has made me tremendously remiss about writing, since I have simply had to devote all my more tolerable moments to work.

Should Weydemeyer not have had Kapital und Arbeit printed yet, I would look it over as the original was full of the most appalling printing errors.341 You have absolutely no idea of the treatment meted out to me by the party, i.e. the Chemnitzers (AS REPRESENTED BY Vahlteich). Only at Liebknecht's insistence, and also because Chemnitz had represented the thing as extremely urgent, did I undertake the work before leaving for Karlsbad, despite the highly disordered state of my nerves. And in view of the many asininities perpetrated by Most (now happily ensconced with Mr Dühring; a conceited laddie who, when he reads something, no matter what, instantly converts it into material for publication) and the small amount of space prescribed, this was no trifle. VERY WELL! Months went by without any news, I made enquiries 12 to which Vahlteich 'coolly' replied, saying the thing was only being set up in such fleeting moments as were left to the party printing office after setting up the Chemnitzers' philistine advertisements! Never before have I encountered such cool effrontery! This meant that the printing took almost a year! And when the opusculum did at last appear, it was swarming with printing errors which distorted the sense!

To avoid losing time it might perhaps be better if you were to go ahead with the printing in the way you suggested, and I was to correct for the second edition what had been printed (which would be far easier).

I and Engels will amend the Communist Manifesto straight away and then let you have it.148

Ad vocem* Capital and Douai: Firstly: Has Douai got a publisher? Secondly: The French edition17 consumed so much of my time that I myself shall not again collaborate in any way on a translation. You must know whether Douai knows enough English to do the thing on his own. If so, he has my full authorisation and my blessing.342 In which case, however:

Thirdly: He must without fail, when translating, compare the 2nd German edition with the French edition in which I have included a good deal of new matter and greatly improved my presentation of much else..There are two things I shall be sending you in the course of this week:

[^1]: a Re



1. A copy of the French edition for Douai. 2. A list of places where the French edition shouldn't be compared with the German, but the French text be used as the only basis.

In Naples Mr Uriele Cavagnari is preparing the Italian edition of Capital (from the French edition); he is having the book printed at his own expense and is going to sell it at cost price. Good man!343

What you write about the Germans in no way surprises me. It's exactly like that over here. That's why Engels and I have disassociated ourselves from the whole bunch (as has Lessner). The only exception is a German working man with whom I am on friendly terms and whose name momentarily escapes me (Weyer,a

I think); he has a seat on the London TRADES' UNION COUNCIL and was responsible for the only sensible resolution—that working men should elect only working men to represent them in the HOUSE OF COMMONS—at the SHAMEFUL TRADES' UNION CONGRESS in Leicester,344 at which the bourgeois played patron, among their number Mr Th. Brassey, the great swindler and millionaire, son of the notorious railway Brassey who 'contracted for' Europe and Asia.

The Ghent Congress,324 whatever else it left to be desired, at least had the advantage that Guillaume and Co. were totally abandoned by their former allies. It was only with difficulty that the Flemish workers were restrained from lambasting the great Guillaume. That bombastic chatterbox De Paepe, and with him Brismée, insulted them; Mr John Hales ditto. The latter placed himself under the command of—Barry whom I had induced to go, partly as a member of Congress (as whose delegate, I don't know), partly as correspondent for the Standard (London).345 I for my part do not wish ever again to become personally involved with Jung and Hales, but their second defection is useful so far as the Jurassians are concerned. Barry is my FACTOTUM here; he also kept an eye on the Times reporters (which newspaper has sacked Mr Eccarius). But more especially it was through him that, for months on end, I sustained incognito a cross-fire against that Russomane Gladstone in London's FASHIONABLE PRESS ( Vanity Fair and Whitehall Review), as also in the English, Scottish and Irish provincial press, unmasking his underhand dealings with the Russian spy Novikova, the Russian Embassy in London, etc.; it was through him, too, that I exerted influence on English parliamentarians in the Commons and the Lords, who would throw up their hands in horror if they

[^1]: a Adam Weiler

[^2]: 20*



knew that it was the RED TERROR DOCTOR, as they call me, who had been their souffleur during the oriental crisis.

That crisis marks a new turning-point in European history. Russia—and I have studied her affairs from original Russian sources, unofficial and official (the latter accessible to only very few, but procured for me by friends in Petersburg),—has long been on the verge of an upheaval; all the elements are to hand. The gallant Turks have advanced the explosion by many years through the blows they have dealt not only to the Russian army and Russian finances, but also personally to the dynasty in command of the army (Tsar,a heir-apparentb and six other Romanovs). The upheaval will begin, secundum artem,c with some constitutional tomfoolery, et puis il y aura un beau tapage.d Unless Mother Nature is exceptionally unkind, we shall yet live to see the fun!

The silly nonsense in which the Russian students are indulging is merely a symptom, and of no value in itself. But symptom it is. All strata of Russian society are economically, morally and intellectually in a state of complete disintegration.

This time the revolution will begin in the East, hitherto the impregnable bastion and reserve army of counter-revolution.

It was with pleasure that Mr Bismarck watched the drubbing, but more than that it was not to be. Russia, if too much weakened, could not again keep Austria in check as she had done during the Franco-Prussian War! And, should revolution actually result there, what would become of the Hohenzollern dynasty's last safeguard?

Just now everything depends on the Poles (in the Kingdom of Poland) lying doggo. Rioting is the last thing that is wanted there at the moment! Bismarck would immediately step in, and Russian chauvinism would again rally round the Tsar. On the other hand, were the Poles to bide their time until Moscow and Petersburg are in flames and Bismarck were then to step in as saviour, Prussia would meet—her Mexico346!

Again and again I have dinned this into such Poles as I am in contact with and as have any influence over their compatriots.

The French crisis347 is an altogether secondary affair compared with the oriental one. Yet one can only hope that the bourgeois republic wins, for otherwise we shall have the same old game all over again, and no nation can afford to repeat the same stupidities too often.

[^1]: a Alexander II - b Prince Alexander Alexandrovich (future Emperor Alexan- der III) - c by the rules of the game - d and then there'll be a fine how-do-you-do.



