---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "195. Engels to Hermann Engels. 5 October "
Page_Range: "308-309"
---

# 195. Engels to Hermann Engels. 5 October 

With warmest regards from myself and my wife,

Your

Karl Marx

Postscript The Genevan notary, Wessel, has informed me of the business of Lingenau's will.348

We (i.e. the executors) shall have to appoint a proxy in America, and you would be thé only suitable person. What we need to know above all, however, is how the matter stands in America and whether the will can be implemented without endless court proceedings. You would oblige me if you could make inquiries about this and let me know.

First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English in full for the F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 f l r s t t l m e

195

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

London, 5 October 1877

Dear Hermann,

At the end of this month (31 October) I shall have to make payments of approx. £380 and should therefore be pleased if you would send me the corresponding amount pretty soon. Might I add that I should be grateful if it could be so arranged that the remittance is made payable here before the 31st (incl. the three days of grace, hence nominally payable on the 27th inst. at the latest), since I should otherwise be unable, local banking practice being what it is, to avail myself of it on the 31st and, for anyone not in business, discounting is always troublesome and sometimes, even, well nigh impossible unless one gets various other people moving; and I should imagine that the Barmen Bankers' Association can make payment three days after date or sight as readily as ten.

[^1]: IN ENGELSKIRCHEN



