---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "196. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 October "
Page_Range: "309-310"
---

# 196. Engels to Ludwig Kugelmann. 12 October 



**[p. 280]**

I've loafed about a great deal this summer, seven weeks at the seaside 2 8 9 and then a fortnight in Scotland,333 but it has actually done me a tremendous amount of good.

N o doubt you will now admit that I was right in my assessment of the Turks' power of resistance and the weakness of the Russians in attack.3 Next year the Turks will be twice as strong because they will be able to train their men during the winter. Should the Russians not move their army across the Danube for the winter, and this I can scarcely believe, they may be in for a surprise. Ice floes on the Danube, for instance, have scant respect for pontoon bridges, even if they do belong to the Emperor of Russia. Still, come what may, Russia will have her Constitution before the end of 1878 and, with it, the second edition of the French Revolution of 1789-94.

T h e man who has largely prevented the T u r k s from playing an altogether different kind of game with the Russians is the Sultan's b

brother-in-law, Mahmud Damad Pasha, friend of Ignatiyev and for years in the latter's pay. Should you ever hear that he has been overthrown, you may rest assured that the vigour with which the war is conducted will be of a completely different order. H e is also the man who brought about Mehemet Ali's recall.

Your

Friedrich

196

ENGELS T O LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

London, 12 October 1877 Dear Kugelmann,

and a university lecturer from Munich staying with me) to inform

[^1]: Love to Emma, c the children, and all brothers and sisters,

[^2]: First published abridged in Deutsche Printed according to the original Revue, Jg. 46, Bd. 3, Stuttgart- , , . , , . „ , . , r Leipzig, 1921 and in full in: Marx and Published m English for the first Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. t l m e XXVI, Moscow, 1935

[^3]: I am writing in great haste (I have a chemist from Mannheim d

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 187-88. - b Abdul Hamid II's - c Emma Engels - d Probably Philipp Pauli



