---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "197. Engels to Hermann Engels. 13 October "
Page_Range: "310-311"
---

# 197. Engels to Hermann Engels. 13 October 



**[p. 281]**

you as requested that I have received your letter and that, if I have the time and am able to do so, I shall gladly supply Mr Ecker with information as soon as I know more precisely what he wants of me.349 I doubt if I can be of much help to him, for a perfect working man's dwelling, which on the one hand meets all the sanitary, etc., requirements and on the other won't cost the working man too much, is, as you know, like a triangular square.

We are getting on pretty well here; Marx has been at Neuenahr,307 for the moment his liver is back to normal, his nerves are better, hence also his nights and, but for his being such a prey to colds, there would be little to complain of. I myself am very well; loafed about a lot during the summer, on top of which there have been numerous visitors, but I think I shall be able to get back to work next week.

Best wishes,

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, „ , ,. , , . ,, ,. . „ , Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

197

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

London, 13 October 1877

Dear Hermann,

It will be quite all right if the sum is made payable to me here in the manner described, but on the 30th.a It must go through my bank, you see, and won't be credited there until the relevant cheque has actually been received by the CLEARING HOUSE in the afternoon; but by then the bank will be closed and I shan't be able to make use of it until the following day. Would you also be good enough to advise me which banker in Barmen is placing the money at my disposal, so that I can establish my identity;

[^1]: IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 279.



