---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "198. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 19 October "
Page_Range: "311-314"
---

# 198. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 19 October 

otherwise, if one no longer represents a firm, one frequently runs into difficulties in a case like this.

The collapse of the Russian army's organisations, command, staff, ammunition supply, rations, clothing, camp administration, etc., becomes daily ever more complete, a mighty debacle entailing the sacrifice of some 100,000 men. During the last fortnight in September and the first week in October the Russians are said to have lost 15,000 dead (i.e. those who died of wounds and sickness) and, since the beginning of the war, 47,000 dead alone. If they stay before Plevna360 and on the Lom for another three weeks, it could be that the entire army will disintegrate.

Best wishes.

Your

Friedrich

There has in fact been a bit of frost here too, but the geraniums are still flowering a little outside. In Scotland, however, the entire harvest is done for; on 20 September, near Edinburgh, I noticed that the corn was still quite green.333

First published in Deutsche Revue, Jg. 46, Printed according to the original Bd. 3, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1921 „ , , . _ ,. , , , ,. r ° Published in English for the first time

198

[London,] 19 October 1877

Dear Sorge,

At the same time as this letter, I am sending you the enclosed manuscript for Douai, in case he is doing the translation of Capital." The manuscript contains, besides a few alterations to the German text, indications as to where the latter is to be replaced by the French edition.17 In the copy of the French edition intended for

[^1]: MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE52

[^2]: IN HOBOKEN

[^3]: a See this volume, pp. 276-77.



Douai, also despatched to your address today, the above- mentioned passages in the manuscript are marked. I found the work much more time-consuming than I had thought, added to which I had a nasty bout of influenza and have not quite got over it yet.

In case of publication,342 Douai must say in the foreword that, besides the 2nd German edition, he has used the French edition which came out later and was revised by me, but BY NO MEANS that this American edition has been authorised by the writer. Were he to do so, English booksellers would at once set about pirating it in England, and would be legally entitled to do so. Although I am happy to concede translation rights all over Europe, wherever there is a COPYRIGHT [agreement] with England, this certainly does not apply to England, that land of Mammon. London booksellers have already made several attempts, frustrated by me, to contrive an English edition without my consent and hence also without payment. I, however, am quite determined that these gentlemen shall not enrich themselves at my expense, be it by a penny.

Just at the moment Engels' time is taken up in all kinds of ways, first by work for the Vorwärts,155 secondly by a flood of philistine visitors from Germany, thirdly by his own 'influenza', and fourthly by his wife's illness. This is why we have been unable to tackle the Manifesto together to date.148

In Germany a corrupt spirit is asserting itself in our party, not so much among the masses as among the leaders (upper class and 'workers'). The compromise with the Lassalleans has led to further compromise with other waverers; in Berlin (via Most) with Dühring and his 'admirers', not to mention a whole swarm of immature undergraduates and over-wise graduates who want to give socialism a 'higher, idealistic' orientation, i.e. substitute for the materialist basis (which calls for serious, objective study if one is to operate thereon) a modern mythology with its goddesses of Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternité. Dr Höchberg, the gentle- man who edits the Zukunft, is a representative of this tendency and has 'bought his way' into the party—no doubt with the 'noblest' of intentions, but I don't give a fig for 'intentions'. Seldom has anything more pitiful than his programme for the Zukunft been ushered into the world with more 'modest pretensions'.

The workers themselves, when like Mr Most and Co. they give up working and become literati by profession, invariably wreak 'theoretical' havoc and are always ready to consort with addle- heads of the supposedly 'learned' caste. In particular, what we had been at such pains to eject from the German workers' heads

decades ago, thereby ensuring their theoretical (and hence also practical) ascendancy over the French and English,—namely Utopian socialism, the play of the imagination on the future structure of society,—is once again rampant and in a far more ineffectual form, not only as compared with the great French and English Utopians, but with—Weitling. It stands to reason that Utopianism which bore within itself the seeds of critical and materialist socialism, before the advent of the latter, can now, post festum, only seem silly, stale and thoroughly reactionary.

Latterly the governing principle of the Vorwärts would seem to have been to accept manuscripts — 'copie', as the French say — regardless of its provenance. To take a few of the recent numbers,— first we find a chap unacquainted with the rudiments of economics providing grotesque revelations about the 'laws' governing crises.351 All he reveals is his own inner 'collapse'. And then we actually get a pert lad from Berlin being allowed to publish, at the 'sovereign people's' expense, an endless series of articles containing his unedifying thoughts on England and the most egregious Pan-Slav poppycock 352

Satis superque!*

Your

Karl Marx

Apropos. Some (a few) years since, a kind of Blue Book (whether official or not, I don't know) came out on the conditions of the MINERS in Pennsylvania353 who are known to be in a state of altogether feudal dependence on their MONEY LORDS (I believe the thing came out after a bloody encounter354). It is of the utmost importance that I should have that publication and, if you can get hold of it for me, I will send you what it costs; if not, you might be able to let me have the title, in which case I should apply to Harney (in Boston).

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von loh. Phil. Becker, Tos. Dietzgen, , ,. , . Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in Engl.sh in full for the F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: a Enough is as good as a feast!



