---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "199. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 23 October "
Page_Range: "314-315"
---

# 199. Marx to Wilhelm Bracke. 23 October 



**[p. 199]**

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

[London,] 23 October 1877

Dear Bracke,

Your news is bad but was readily predictable. I have already suggested on a number of- occasions that you should kick out the gracious Isolde.3 However much corrected, her product remains an abortion.254 Add to that the waste of time, waste of money, etc. There can be no legal objection to that person's being 'kicked out' since she does not, and is unable to, perform what she contractually undertook to do. Bios had at one time proffered his services (unfortunately not until after Isolde).194

The review, Zukunft, is by no means satisfactory, its main endeavour being to substitute ideological catch-phrases such as 'justice', etc., for materialist knowledge. Its programme is wretched! Promises, what's more, to peddle phantasms of the future structure of society. This, the first result of a bourgeois13

buying his way into the party, is not a happy one—as might have been predicted.

The Vorwärts, too, is publishing a mass of immature, stereotyped essays by aspiring and presumptuous striplings.c I shouldn't have thought the proletariat's money was intended to provide a dumping-ground for such exercises.

I trust your health is improving. I myself have been suffering from influenza for several weeks,— most disruptive of work.

Yours,

K. M.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a Isolde Kurz - b Karl Höchberg - c See also previous letter.



