---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "202. Marx to Wilhelm Bios. 10 November "
Page_Range: "317-318"
---

# 202. Marx to Wilhelm Bios. 10 November 



**[p. 202]**

MARX TO WILHELM BLOS368

IN HAMBURG

London, 10 November 1877 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Bios,

I was delighted to hear from you [Dir]3 again at last (that 'Dir' slipped naturally from my pen. So do drop the 'Sie'h in future). I had long since proposed that the abominable Isolde0 be dismissed, and fulminated against her in vain.

Whenever, in 'la Place', the word place is written with a capital P, it always means the Place Vendôme, that being the seat of the commander of the National Guard; in Paris at the time he was the equivalent of what we call 'town-major'.

As regards the 'suppression de l'Etat',à an expression which Lissagaray himself will be altering in the 2nd French edition,6 the sense is no different from that expounded in my pamphlet on the 'Civil War' in France/ In short, you can translate it 'abolition (or suppression) of the class state'.

I 'bear no ill-will' (as Heine says)g and nor for that matter does Engels.359 Neither of us cares a straw for popularity. Let me cite one proof of this: such was my aversion to the personality cult that at the time of the International, when plagued by numerous moves—originating from various countries—to accord me public honour, I never allowed one of these to enter the domain of publicity, nor did I ever reply to them, save with an occasional snub. When Engels and I first joined the secret communist society, we did so only on condition that anything conducive to a superstitious belief in authority be eliminated from the Rules.360

(Lassalle subsequently operated in the reverse direction.)

But events such as occurred at the last party congress286—they are being well and truly exploited by enemies of the party abroad—have in any case made it necessary for us to be circumspect in our relations with 'party members in Germany'.

Apart from that, my state of health compels me to devote to the

[^1]: a The familiar form of address in German: 'Dir'—'Thee'. - b you (as opposed to 'Du') - c Isolde Kurz - d suppression of the state - e [P. O.] Lissagaray, Histoire de la Commune de 1871. - f K. Marx, The Civil War in France. - s H. Heine, Lyrisches Intermezzo, 'Ich grolle nicht'.



