---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "205. Engels to Marx. End of 1877- beginning of 1878 "
Page_Range: "319-321"
---

# 205. Engels to Marx. End of 1877- beginning of 1878 



**[p. 204]**

MARX TO SIBYLLE HESS355

IN PARIS

London, 29 November 1877 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Mrs Hess,

Both I and Engels have been absent from London for some considerable time and, after returning, I necessarily had first to read our late friend's book,356 before being in a position to write to you.

Engels and I thank you very much for sending the same. In so far as we have any influence, we shall endeavour to disseminate it. It contains some brilliant notions but unfortunately—no doubt because Hess could not put the finishing touches to it—there are quite a number of dubious points that lend themselves to attack by professional natural scientists.

Wishing you the best of success, I remain

Yours sincerely,

Karl Marx

205

[London, end of 1877-beginning of 1878] Saturday morning

Dear Moor,

I have gone and got me two swollen ankles and shall be unable to wear boots for a couple of days. I shall drive to the bank forthwith to collect some money and, if you care to come this evening, you will find what you require.

[^1]: First published in Vorwärts, Nr. 67, Printed according to the original Basel, 9. Februar 1930, Beilage

[^2]: ENGELS TO MARX363

[^3]: IN LONDON





**[p. 291]**

Tussy is quite right; Maskelyne should be read either after or at the 5am« time as Wallace, for the details about people in Maskelyne, all of which cannot possibly be remembered, acquire interest only through the intimate knowledge of these various persons displayed by Wallace. So be so kind as to return it when you come so that I shall be able to appreciate Wallace in all his

FOOLERY.

Your

F. E.

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

