---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "206. Marx to Thomas Allsop. 1 January "
Page_Range: "321-322"
---

# 206. Marx to Thomas Allsop. 1 January 



**[p. 292]**

1878

206

MARX TO THOMAS ALLSOP

IN LONDON

[London,] 1 January 1878

My dear Friend,

I hope one good thing the new year will do—act beneficently upon your health.

My best thanks for the Owen addresses and proclamations.3

The Trafalgar Square meeting of Friday last was much more important than the newspaper reports would make it appear.364

There was a gathering of at least 15,000-20,000 people. The Russian party, as represented by the Honourable Bradlaugh, Hales, Mottershead, Osborne, etc., was forced, after a tremendous hand to hand fight, to evacuate the place with torn dresses, swollen eyes and broken noses. A dozen wounded were delivered to the next hospital. John Bull came out as a true bull and not as a lamb. The Turkish party was in overwhelming majority. Entre nous, I had somewhat my hand in getting up this demonstration, as, in point of fact, I have since many, many months acted through some British workmen and ci-devant b workmen upon the very diversified layers of the Pro-Turkishers. But, of course, if I had made the least public move, the whole thing would have been spoilt. In such national affairs no foreigner must appear. If he thinks it his duty to do something, he must do so secretly, behind the scenes, by a few natives upon whose discretion he can rely. One day I shall tell you [about] the very strange relations into which I have thus entered with British Grandees who would get into a white rage if they had the least suspicion under whose advice they were acting.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 262-63. - b former



