---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "207. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 11 January "
Page_Range: "322-325"
---

# 207. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 11 January 

I have received letters and prints from Russia.363 The misery now prevailing there is truly shocking. Save the governmental dependents and the by no means strong fraction of Pan-Slavists, discontent is universal. They had hoped peace would be at once concluded after the fall of Plevna.350

As to Turkey, the great danger for her is Mahmud Damad who alone is responsible for the failure of the first campaign. This fact is known at Constantinople, and I wonder whether some fanatical Softas156 will not have the good sense to 'extinguish' that scoundrel. As Hobbes said: The equality of men is proved by this that the smallest man, the weakest man, can in one way or other kill the tallest, the biggest one."

Apart from all incidents of war, with the help of that model administration the Russians owe, the winter in Bulgaria will decimate their army. Already all their pontoon-bridges, save that of Zimnicea366 (which also will not stand the repeated attacks of the Danube ice), are swept away, and, by the by, they will be cut off from Wallachia.

In France the Dufaure cabinet will not last long. The discovery of the military conspiracy will kill it.367

The whole family send you their new year wishes and you know that they come from the heart.

Yours most devotedly,

Karl Marx

207

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

London, 11 January 1878 Dear Old Man,

Avant tout,b a Happy New Year to you, and may it bring you less in the way of troubles and burdens than the previous one!

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English) and in Japanese, in Kehai Gakuronshu, Vol. 35, No. 1, Tokyo, 1969

[^2]: IN GENEVA

[^3]: a Marx is rendering a passage from Th. Hobbes, Leviathan, or the Matter, Form and Power of the Commonwealth Ecclesiastical and Civil. - b First of all

[^4]: 21*



The package eventually arrived a few days ago.a My best thanks. I have not quite finished looking through the Bulletin jurassien; I find it interesting to follow the decline of that gang and its ultimate relegation to the back of the stage as a result of our electoral victories of 10 January 1877.237 Let them now scheme and snarl to their heart's content; they've gone to pot and there they will remain.368

You will be receiving from the post office a money order for 50 frs which you should regard as our contribution to the Précurseur. In accordance with the new regulations, I have to retain over here the receipt they gave me; the money order, or so they tell me, will be sent to you from Basle.

We are pretty well. Marx is notably better as compared with former years; his wife is not quite up to the mark, but the doctorb

promises a complete cure; I myself cannot complain.

Things seem to be going very well indeed for you people in Switzerland; the formation of a workers' party is a great step forward 369 and, even if the programme isn't nearly radical enough for the taste of Messieurs les Bakounistes, it doesn't matter a damn. A party that has the political means to take a direct part in the struggle, and the prospect of soon being able to throw a not inconsiderable weight into the scales, as is the case in Switzerland, has better things to do than to force each individual collaborator to accept its ultimate aims as dogma. There is, of course, much room for improvement in the programme, but it was modelled on the garrulous programme concocted in Germany at the time of the unification.121

In Germany, too, big mistakes were made, in particular as regards the attitude adopted—in a spirit altogether Bakuninist— towards the French crisis.292 And yet on this occasion we again saw how far ahead of us France has come in matters of practice. Lousy though the solution may have so far proved to be, it is nevertheless the first time that anything has been achieved there without a violent upheaval367—and violence there, so soon after the bloodbath of 1871, could only lead to the revival of repression and of Bonapartism. But as it is, there is every prospect that the workers will very shortly gain freedom of the press, the right of association and assembly and whatever else is requisite for organisation and struggle, and that is all they need to begin with. They are in a position to discover where they stand theoretically, as is most necessary, and at last, when the opportunity presents

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 214. - b George Allen



itself, to enter the revolution as a tightly knit party and with a definite programme. And then again, the debonapartisation and republicanisation of the peasants, which is now in full swing, is another tremendous gain. And, lastly, the decisive point was reached because the common soldier declared he would not fight—the collapse of militarism has begun from within and may soon find a sequel in Germany, especially if present policy should make it necessary to lead the army into the field in support of the Russians.

Another big mistake in Germany is to have allowed students and other ignorant 'scholars', in the guise of scientific representatives of the party, to flood the world at large with vast quantities of the most arrant nonsense. However, this is a childish ailment which has to be got over, and it is precisely in order to hasten it on that I made such a thorough example of Diihring.3

That apart, things are going quite splendidly there as well and, if they now really get cracking with their anti-Russian agitation, it might prove very effective.

Apropos, B'uffenoir, whom the Vorwärts is presently making such a fuss of,370 is a somewhat ambiguous individual; in the first place, he's a clericalist, in the second he has recently eulogised Gambetta in effusive poetical verse and has no standing whatever amongst the workers of Paris. Another instance of Liebknecht's getting himself into a mess.

I hope the peace terms proposed by the Russians will be such that the war will go on. Not having any bridges over the Danube, their army is cut off and might starve miserably if the weather stays bad. And an undecided war, or fresh defeats, would undoubtedly give rise to revolution in Petersburg. Initially started by the court and constitutional, in other words 1789 preceding 1793.371 Just let a national assembly convene in Petersburg, and the whole of Europe will assume a different aspect.

Your old friend

F. E.

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a F. Engels, Anti-Dühring.



