---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "209. Marx to Thomas Allsop. 4 February "
Page_Range: "327-328"
---

# 209. Marx to Thomas Allsop. 4 February 

made possible. This is already plainly evident from the behaviour of the Russians vis-à-vis the Romanian government which had gone to the rescue of those same Russians at Plevna before Muscovite reinforcements arrived. Karl von Hohenzollern is now to demonstrate his gratitude by handing back the part of Bessarabia ceded by the Russians after the Crimean War.378 That this will not be permitted out of hand by Berlin, Petersburg is aware, and is prepared to make HANDSOME compensation.

But there are other aspects to all this. Turkey and Austria were the last bulwarks of the old European political order that was patched up again in 1815; with their downfall it will suffer total collapse. This debacle—which will take the form of a series of ('localised' and ultimately 'general') wars—will precipitate the social crisis—-and with it the decline of all these sabre-rattling SHAM POWERS.

First published in: W. Liebknecht, Zur Printed according to the text of orientalischen Frage, 2. Aufl., Leipzig, the pamphlet 1 878

Published in English in full for the first time

209

MARX TO THOMAS ALLSOP

[London,] 4 February 1878

You are mistaken, if you believe that Disraeli is in my opinion a great man. He was always a self-seeker, and such people, whatever their natural gifts, are always deficient. But, dans le royaume des aveugles les borgnes, etc.a!

as a small man or an adversary easily to be borne down! He is, on the contrary, the mightiest man in the British Empire. On the one hand, the oldest nobility man, on the other the intellectual incarnation of the great middle-class. Business is business—this is the only serious part of your bourgeois: everything else is

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: [Extract]

[^3]: You are still more mistaken, if you consider Lord Commonplaceb

[^4]: a Dam le royaume des aveugles les borgnes sont rois—In the kingdom of the blind the one-eyed is King. - b The Earl of Derby (see also this volume, p. 296).



