---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "212. Marx to Valerian Smirnov. 29 March "
Page_Range: "334-335"
---

# 212. Marx to Valerian Smirnov. 29 March 



**[p. 305]**

for its lunatic flights of fancy on the subject of the oriental imbroglio. But now a friend of mine in Germany3 is persecuting me by occasionally sending me what he believes to be an interesting issue of the paper. From what little (but nevertheless still 'over-much') that has thus come my way, it seems to me that a marked change is occurring in the line taken by the paper. Is this the case, or is it not? Has Mr Sonnemann shifted further to the 'right'?

I trust that you are having better weather than we are. Since my return from Germany in mid-September307 I have suffered from a permanent cough, etc.

With kindest regards I am, Sir,

Yours sincerely,

Karl Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981 Published in English for the first time

212

[London,] 29 March 1878 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. Dear Smirnov,

I take it that you are still editor of the Bnepedi>!,h and therefore that this note will find you at the address I have selected.

Party friends in Paris have asked me for information about two agitators within our societies in Paris, namely a 'Prince Kropotkin' and a lady, one 'Kulishova', a particular friend of Costa's.

Do you, perhaps, know anything about these individuals from the political aspect?

Yours very faithfully,

Karl Marx

[^1]: MARX TO VALERIAN SMIRNOV389

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in International Review , , . , • • ,. for Social History, Vol. Ill, Leiden, 1938 Published in English for the first time

[^4]: Presumably Carl Hirsch. - b Vperyod! (Forward!)



