---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "213. Engels to Carl Hirsch. 3 April "
Page_Range: "335-336"
---

# 213. Engels to Carl Hirsch. 3 April 



**[p. 213]**

ENGELS TO CARL HIRSCH

IN PARIS •«: London, 3 April 1878

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Hirsch,

Would you be so kind as to forward the enclosed note3 to Lopatin? We don't know whether the old address we have for him still holds good.b It has to do with an article for Bracke's Kalender on the condemned Russians.390—The Égalité hasn't been arriving for some time past; I hope nothing has happened to it. With the suspension of the Bulletin jurassienc for want of money, the Bakuninists' swaggering has come to an inglorious end. It's encouraging to see the movement growing so powerful that it can sweep aside every one of these rubbishy factions without undue difficulty. As soon as I have a complete set of them here I shall send you some articles of mine on the movement in 1877,d which have appeared in the New York Labor Standard. As regards Dühring, I've all but finished now. No doubt you will shortly see something more about his 'socialism' in the Vorwärts.11 This worthy man has cost me an atrocious amount of time, but unfortunately there was no [alternative], it being a case of all or nothing. Precious chaps, these anarchists! That great enemy of the state, Adhémar Schwitzguébel, Guillaume's right-hand man, who would rather chop off his own hand than place a voting-paper in a ballot box, is an officer dans l'armée fédérale1', as the Bulletin jurassien itself declares. Kindest regards to all our friends, especially Kaub and Mesa.

Yours very sincerely,

F. E.

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in Marx- Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: a See next letter. - b From February 1878 Lopatin stayed in Montreux. - c Bulletin

[^5]: de la Federation jurassienne de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs - ^ F. Engels, The Workingmen of Europe in 1877. - e F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, Part III. - f in the federal army



