---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "220. Engels to Valerian Smirnov. 16 July "
Page_Range: "341-342"
---

# 220. Engels to Valerian Smirnov. 16 July 

I would not dream of dedicating a 'book' to Mr Bûcher. He owes me an answer to my '30' lines.3 I have neither the time nor any reason to supply the '3,000' lines he deems necessary in place of his own.398 This fable is the progeny of the London correspondent of the Vossische Zeitung, he, so far as I am aware, being Dr Elard Biscamp, a notorious blackguard.399 This time, however, his bad joke has come off.

The state of my health bids me go to Karlsbad. But Mr Bis- marck, who was so urgently bidden to go to Kissingen, doesn't want me to.29 H TO 4"L\a Tb? (que faire?h), as the Russians say.400

Look round for a makeshift in the shape of a British seaside resort not as yet under the aegis of the new Holy Alliance's143 saviours of society. My wife is seriously ill and will probably have to go to Karlsbad; it seems unlikely that her ex-ladyship, the ex-Baroness von Westphalen, will be regarded as contraband.

I trust your trip will do you good. Should you spend any length of time in one place, you might write to me from there. I shall probably have an article of mine in English (not yet printed)c to send you which, however, will have absolutely nothing to do with the good 'FATHERLAND', AS THE ENGLISH CALL IT.

With kindest regards,

Karl Marx

220

ENGELS TO VALERIAN SMIRNOV

[London,] 16 July 1878 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W. My dear Mr Smirnov,

which I trust you have received.

[^1]: 8 Yours,

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN LONDON

[^4]: Yesterday I sent you a copy of my anti-Dühring pamphlet401

[^5]: 3 K. Marx, 'Reply to Bucher's "Declaration"'. - b what is to be done? - c K. Marx, 'Mr. George Howell's History of the International Working Men's Associa- tion'.



