---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "221. Engels to Oscar Schmidt. 19 July "
Page_Range: "342-343"
---

# 221. Engels to Oscar Schmidt. 19 July 

I also wished to send copies both to Lopatin and to Lavrov, but I do not know whether Lopatin is still in Switzerland, nor the present address of either of them in Paris. If you could tell me to what addresses I should send the pamphlets, I should be most obliged to you.

Yours ever,

F. Engels

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French), in International Review for Social History, Vol. Ill, Leiden, 1938 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

221

ENGELS TO OSCAR SCHMIDT

IN STRASBOURG

[London, 19 July 1878]

Dear Sir,

In yesterday's no. of Nature I see an announcement of a lecture to be given by you at the natural scientists' conference in Kassel 'on the relation of Darwinism to Social Democracy'.402

That the advocates of Darwinism in Germany would not be able to evade the necessity of adopting a position vis-à-vis the socialist world outlook was something socialists had foreseen long before Mr Virchow so amiably tipped the wink.40S Whatever that position may turn out to be, it can only contribute to the clarification of the situation and of men's minds. On the other hand, it is desirable from both points of view that this should be done in full awareness of the facts.

By way of making a contribution of my own, I am taking the liberty of sending you by post a copy of my work Herr Eugen

Diihring's etc., which has just come out.401 In it, I have en- deavoured to give, among other things, an outline of the relation of scientific socialism to the propositions of modern theoretical natural science in general, and to Darwin's theory in particular. The passages relating to Darwinism are marked.

[^1]: [Draft]



