---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "223. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 10 August "
Page_Range: "345-346"
---

# 223. Engels to Pyotr Lavrov. 10 August 

Marx is comparatively well for this time of year. His eldest daughter has had another baby, a boy.409 Congratulations from us all on your 'No. 8'.410 So if Mrs Marx isn't sent to the Continent, you are unlikely to have any visitors from over here this year.

Pumps is as lazy about writing as ever, if not more so. But in other respects the school in Manchester has done her a lot of good.411

Kindest regards from us all to you, your wife2 and the children.

Your

F. Engels

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time

223

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

London, 10 August 1878 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Mr Lavrov,

I hope you have received the copy of my anti-Diihring401 which I sent off to you yesterday. I should have sent it earlier had I known your present address. I wrote to Smirnov,b 4 Lower Charles St., and then to Lopatin,15 6 rue Linné, to ask for it, but neither has replied. Could you let me know where I should send Lopatin's copy? We find his silence somewhat disturbing, for an earlier letter,1 sent to him at the same address, was forwarded to him to Switzerland where, or so he wrote and told me, he intended to stay only until the month of June; and since then Hauajiod reports his having been arrested in Russia.412 Although the news is not without chronological snags, his silence makes us anxious.

As you will have seen, the German Darwinians have, in response to Virchow's appeal,403 come out unequivocally against socialism.

[^1]: IN PARIS

[^2]: a Ida Pauli - b See this volume, pp. 312-13. - c Ibid., p. 307. - d Nachalo (The Beginning)



