---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "224. Marx to George Rivers. 24 August "
Page_Range: "346-347"
---

# 224. Marx to George Rivers. 24 August 

Haeckel, whose pamphlet I have just received, limits himself to speaking in general terms about the 'crazy doctrines of socialism',3

but Mr Oscar Schmidt of Strasbourg is going to flatten us con amoreh at the natural scientists' conference0 in Kassel.402 It's a waste of effort. If reaction in Germany gets the bit between its teeth, its first victims, after the socialists, will be the Darwinians. Anyway, whatever happens to them, I shall take it upon myself to reply to these gentlemen.404 And in any case, we have every reason to be satisfied with that event as, indeed, with events in general. Mr Bismarck who, for 7 years, has been working for us as if he was in our pay, now appears incapable of moderating his offers to speed up the advent of socialism. Après moi le déluge413 does not suffice him; he insists upon having that deluge in his own lifetime—let his will be done. I am only afraid that he will do his work too well and that the deluge will arrive before its appointed time.

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels

First published, in Russian, in Letopisi Printed according to the original marksizma, Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, , noo Translated from the French Published in English for the first time

224

[London,] 24 August 1878 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

indulged in the bad joke that I had written a book Herr Bücher"; thereupon the false rumour spread through Germany, and the

[^1]: MARX TO GEORGE RIVERS414

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: The London Correspondent of the Berlin Vossische Zeitungd

[^4]: a E. Haeckel, Freie Wissenschaft und freie Lehre, Stuttgart, 1878, pp. 3-4. Engels quotes from Haeckel in German. - b lovingly - c In the original: 'Naturforscherver- sammlung'. - d Elard Biscamp - c See this volume, p. 312.



