---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "229. Marx to Engels. 17 September "
Page_Range: "350-353"
---

# 229. Marx to Engels. 17 September 



**[p. 321]**

HIS HOME. If he makes good progress, as I hope, it might be better not to leave until Saturday (instead of Friday3). For one additio- nal day's rest and recuperation is of great importance in his case.

Today Engels took himself off to Hampton419 with Madame Renshaw and Pumps who has already put on quite the air, not to say BEHAVIOUR, of a 'princesse régnante', along with the 5 GUINEA mourning gown; this last, however, has only served to increase her ill-conceived 'glee'. Tussy will be sending you further details of these peculiar goings-on.

According to the news sent by Liebknecht, Bismarck's Bill420 will be rejected out of hand or else passed with modifications that will draw its sting.

MY BEST LOVE TO YOU AND YOUR MAMA Puppy,' the good little fellow, is much improved.

Your

Moor

First published, in the language of the Printed according to the original original (German), in Annali, an. 1, Milano, 1958

229

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 17 September 1878

The news from Malvern is much better so that it won't be necessary for me to go there; but for safety's sake the doctor is now calling regularly every day; I had already suggested as much to my wife so as to prevent their constantly flying into needless

[^1]: IN LITTLEHAMPTON 4 1 9

[^2]: DEAR FRED, I am writing this letter before going to your house (it is still very early); should I find a letter for you there, I shall send it under separate cover.

[^3]: a 20 September (see this volume, p. 332). - b reigning princess - c Probably Henry Longuet.





**[p. 322]**

PANICS on the one hand and neglecting necessary precautions on the other; but she and above all Jennychen foolishly objected, not wishing, as they said, to add 'needlessly' to the already enormous doctors' BILLS in Malvern. Now they realise that I was right. I had similarly prescribed a regular drive at the best time of day, whenever the child's3 condition permitted. This, too, has now been endorsed by the doctor. These drives are Jennychen's only recreation and, for my wife—whose cure has been seriously impaired by the continual TROUBLES with the child—the only means of combatting these influences which are so detrimental to her health. So long as I remained there,410 I saw to it that this was done.

Mr Eulenburg (vide PAPERS OF TODAY)42' will not, for his part, be carrying any coals to Newcastle.b Anything more pitiful than the EXTRACT—quintessence—of his SPEECH I have yet to see. Stolberg, too, is good. The purpose of the exceptional law420 is to deprive the Social-Democratic movement of every vestige of legality. Probatum est^ Mettre hors la loid has, from time immemorial, been an infallible means of making anti-government movements 'illegal', and protecting the government from the law—la légalité nous tue.422 Reichensperger represents the Rhenish bourgeois of the Centre.423 Bamberger adheres faithfully to 'We are but dogs!'.407

Bebel has clearly made an impression.424 (See Daily News OF

It's a good beginning. According to various English newspapers our friend Kovalevsky has been shot in Odessa; they spell his name thus—Kowalsky. The FAT BOY, who came to see me on Sunday,6 told me a very choice anecdote. Before his departure, sundry 'diplomatic' aspirants amongst his Moscow students had to sit an examination. They included a number of laddies much older than himself, notably Montenegrins, who were being given an academic training at the expense of the RUSSIAN ASIATIC (DIPLOMATIC) DEPARTMENT. These laddies are distinguished by their DENSENESS and advanced age, as once the country bumpkins at our grammar school in Trier, who were preparing to enter the seminary (Catholic) and most of them drawing stipends.

Although marks (for university examinations) in Russia run from 0 to 5, Kovalevsky awarded only two lots of marks—4 for

[^1]: TO-DAY.)

[^2]: a Jean Longuet's - b A punning reference to the name Eulenburg, 'Eulen'=owls, and 'to take owls to Athens', the equivalent of carrying coals to Newcastle. - c It has been proved. - d To put outside the law - e 15 September



those who knew nothing at all and 5 for those who knew something. During the last examinations he was approached by one of his students, a long, lanky Montenegrin of 32, who said: 'You must award me a 5; I know that I don't know anything, but on the other hand I know that, if I get "another" 4, the ASIATIC DEPARTMENT will send me packing back to Montenegro; so that's why you must award me a 5.' Needless to say, he failed his examination with flying colours, since Kovalevsky—as, indeed, he had told him—could see NO NECESSITY for his continued residence in Moscow.

The oddest part of it is—or so Kovalevsky says—that all these laddies from Montenegro become imbued while in Moscow with a fanatical hatred of the Russians. They naively told him as much themselves, the alleged reason being that 'the Russians IN GENERAL, and Russian students in particular, tell us we're barbarians and blockheads and treat us as such'. Hence the Russian government achieves precisely the opposite of what it intended with its 'benefactions'.

What used to be a private joke of ours, namely that it's the Russian socialists who commit the 'atrocities' for which the 'law-abiding' German Social-Democrats are to be put hors la loi, has been adduced in all seriousness by the fatuous Stolberg.425

Only he forgot to add that, alongside those 'atrocities', there exists in Russia a 'state of law' which is the ideal if unattainable goal aimed at by that squireen Bismarck's bill.

The fact that the Russians, with the support of Prussia and Austria, are yet again seeking 'European mediation' is a highly significant symptom.

Adio. I trust that you are recovering in Littlehampton from your recent shock. Love from Tussy and Lenchen.

Your

Moor

[^1]: First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

[^2]: Printed according to the original

[^3]: Published in English for the first time

[^4]: 23-406



