---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "230. Marx to Jenny Marx. 17 September "
Page_Range: "353-354"
---

# 230. Marx to Jenny Marx. 17 September 



**[p. 230]**

MARX TO JENNY MARX26

IN MALVERN

[London,] 17 September 1878

Dear Jenny,

As arranged on my departure,415 herewith POST OFFICE ORDER for £3. If, in view of the change in circumstances, it shouldn't be enough, let me know immediately.

After my return I suffered from a very severe headache; however, that has got better since I received a reassuring letter about Johnny from dear Jennychen; and your good news today—still continuing, I trust—was balm to me.

I shall not say very much about the goings-on at No. 122 Regent's Park Road, since Tussy is YOUR REGULAR CHRONICLER in that sphere and I mustn't skim off the cream. But I can't resist telling you about one episode which, in its originality, is reminiscent at one and the same time of Balzac and Paul de Kock. When Tussy, MRS Renshaw and Pumps (she has now been KNIGHTED; Engels will be calling her Pumpsia from now on) were sorting out the dead woman's odds and ends, MRS Renshaw found, amongst other things, a small packet of letters (ABOUT eight, six of which were from members of the Marx FAMILY, two from Williams—Ramsgate) and made as if to hand them to MR Chitty, who was present at the operation. * 'No,' said he, 'burn them! I need not see her Letters. I know she was unable to deceive me.'* Could Figaro (I mean the real one of Beaumarchais) have trouvé cela3? As MRS Renshaw remarked later to Tussy: *'Of course, as he had to write her letters, and to read to her the letters she received, he might feel quite sure that these letters contained no secrets for him—but they might do so, for her.'*

Together with this letter I am today sending you The Daily News and The Standard, on account of the telegrams about the German Reichstag.421 Bebel WAS EVIDENTLY THE ONLY SPEAKER IMPOSING ; t h e government spokesmen—Stolberg and Eulenburg—deplorable beyond words; Bamberger true to his motto 'We are but dogs!'407;

[^1]: a thought that up (an allusion to Figaro's words from Beaumarchais' La folle journée, ou le mariage de Figaro, Act V, Scene 8: 'Ah, Figaro, pends-toi; tu n'as pas deviné celui-là!')



