---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "235. Marx to Engels. 24 September "
Page_Range: "360-362"
---

# 235. Marx to Engels. 24 September 



**[p. 331]**

invulnerable in Paris. Now he's likely to pay for it with a spell in jug, for they'll remand him in custody for as long as they can.428

Barry's adventures really are killing." I, too, saw Levy's brilliant article6 at a pub where I went to shelter from the rain. The paper0 is worthy of the man.

It is high time there was a change in Constantinople, otherwise the numerous provincial insurrections will bring about a state of affairs conducive to the collapse of European Turkey—i.e. exactly what Bismarck and the Russians want so as to fish in troubled waters and not implement the Treaty of Berlin.430 Midhat's return to Crete and a bold coup on his part could give a different turn to things. If the present state of affairs continues, the Russians will stay there and the renewed prospects of plunder this will give them might also stem the natural course of things inside Russia itself.

We are just off to spend a couple of hours in Brighton.

Your

F. E.

First published in Der Briefwechsel Printed according to the original zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time

235

[London,] 24 September 1878

Herewith a scrawl from Liebknecht432; I opened the letter because I thought it might contain news of the party which would perhaps call for immediate action on our part.

I should be grateful if you would send back Lavrov's letter by return; it arrived today and has not yet been answered. The only

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS431

[^2]: IN LITTLEHAMPTON 4 1 9

[^3]: DEAR FRED,

[^4]: a See this volume, pp. 327-28. - b Ibid., p. 328. - c The Daily Telegraph





**[p. 332]**

interesting thing about it is the passage relating to Wrôblewski,— probably correct, as it is in keeping with his temperament as homme d'action3 and is, moreover, plus ou moinsb confirmed by his silence where we are concerned.

After the opening of the Reichstag, I received the Bill submitted to the same by the government, together with the preamble420; yesterday, from the same quarter (Bracke) I likewise received the stenographic report of the Reichstag sittings of 16 and 17 September.0 One has little conception—even at this stage—either of the AVERAGE Prussian minister's stupidity and his master's0

'ingenuity', or of the nastiness of his hangers-on, the representa- tives of the true-blue German bourgeoisie—until one sees before one the stenographic report of this, its most recent manifestation. I am to some extent occupied in making extracts from it for the English press, but I'm not yet sure whether it's quite what I want for The Daily News.455

The Russians' ploy in Afghanistan,434 like the INCIDENTS in Turkey—all this is of little interest to me now except in so far as it provides argumentum ad hominem" in regard to European state- craft. I am, besides, convinced that nothing Russia, and Prussia INTO THE BARGAIN, can now do on the international stage can have other than pernicious consequences for their regime, nor can it delay the latter's downfall, but only expedite its violent end.

My wife, Jennychen and Johnny arrived here safe and sound on Fridayf afternoon and the whole company took up quarters with us until yesterday evening when Jennychen removed, lock, stock and barrel, to Leighton Grove8 so as to be there to receive

Longuet. But the big man won't be arriving till this evening. The child is much better and, miraculously enough, Jennychen also recovered somewhat during the last few days of her stay in Malvern.

Yesterday old Petzler called in with a letter from a parsonh who edits a magazine, also DABBLES IN SOCIALISM and wants SOME INFORMATION from me.435 Meanwhile Bismarck has again succeeded in placing socialism à l'ordre du jour' so that even la haute politique' is in consequence plus ou moins lost from view.

[^1]: a man of action - b more or less - c Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878, Vol. I, Berlin, 1878, pp. 29-91. - d Bismarck's - e argument based on facts - f 20 September - g the street in London where the Longuets lived - h Moritz Kaufmann - ' on the agenda - i high politics



