---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "236. Marx to Moritz Kaufmann. 3 October "
Page_Range: "362-363"
---

# 236. Marx to Moritz Kaufmann. 3 October 



**[p. 333]**

Hoping that Mother Nature is assisting your recovery, and with love from Tussy, Jennychen and my wife.

Your

Moor

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English in full for the Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 f l r s t t l m e

236

MARX TO MORITZ KAUFMANN435

IN BIRKENHEAD

[Draft]

[London, 3 October 1878 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.]

Dear Sir,

Mr Petzler told me you had written an article on my book The Capital and my life, to be reprinted together with other articles of yours, and that you desired me or Engels to correct any errors on your part.a I can of course not decide how far this is feasible before having got a copy of [the] said article.

The best history of the Commune is Lissagaray's: Histoire de la Commune. Its first edition, however, is exhausted and no second one yet published. The address of Lissagaray is: 35 Fitzroy Street, Fitzroy Square, London, W.; he may perhaps be able to procure you a copy of his work.

En attendant^ I forward you the 'Address' on the Commune written by me immediately after its downfall on behalf of the General Council of the International.0

I shall also send you—if you do not yet possess it—by post a recent publication of my friend Engels: Herrn Eugen Dühring's

[^1]: a See this volume, p. 332. - b In the meantime - c K. Marx, The Civil War in France.



