---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "237. Marx to Moritz Kaufmann. 10 October "
Page_Range: "363-364"
---

# 237. Marx to Moritz Kaufmann. 10 October 



**[p. 334]**

Umwälzung der Wissenschaft, which is very important for a true appreciation of German Socialism.

Yours truly,

Karl Marx

M. Kaufmann, ESQ.

First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

237

MARX TO MORITZ KAUFMANN435

IN BIRKENHEAD

[Draft]

London, 10 October 1878 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

I have confined myself to point out in the proof-sheets one or two mistakes. To enter on the more important mis-statements, I had neither the leisure, nor would it have suited your purpose.

Proof-sheet b. I have struck out: 'one of whom was the youthful Lassalle'. He was never a collaborator of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, though he first entered at that time into personal relations with me.

I have added 'the Russian' translation of the Capital, because it is exactly in Russia that the younger University Professors have openly adopted and defended my theory.436

Proof-sheet d. I have struck out 'and formerly one of its members'. Mehring was never a member of the German Social-Democratic Party; the fact is that, by denouncing to Liebknecht some operations of the manager of the reptile funds,408 he tried to become a member. Soon after, having been publicly branded with infamy by a judgment of the Frankfurt tribunal, on the occasion of his action for defamation against Herr Sonnemann (the proprietor of the Frankfurter Zeitung),437 he boldly accepted his position as a literary

