---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "241. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 15 November "
Page_Range: "372-374"
---

# 241. Marx to Nikolai Danielson. 15 November 



**[p. 241]**

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON320

IN ST PETERSBURG450

London, 15 November 1878 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. My dear Sir,

I received this morning your letter, dated October, 28th. I did not receive the letter you allude to; it may have been intercepted by the German post or been lost; the Prussian postmasters having so much been interfered with on the part of Government, that many letters 'vanished', nobody knows whither, even by mere blundering. In point of fact, the last letter I had the honour to get from you, is dated— 7th May 1877."

The interruption of my own correspondence to you was simply the result of warnings I had received (since the latter date), on the part of friends residing in Russia, to suspend letter-writing to them, as it might, despite the innocent contents of the letters, bring them into trouble.

In regard to the second edition of Capital, I beg to remark431:

1) I wish that the divisions into chapters—and the same holds good for the subdivisions—be made according to the French edition.

2) That the translator compare always carefully the second German edition with the French one, since the latter contains many important changes and additions (though, it is true, I was also sometimes obliged—principally in the first chapter—to 'aplatir'h the matter in its French version).

3) Some changes I consider useful— / shall try to get [them] ready for you at all events within 8 days, so that I may despatch them Saturday next (to-day is Friday).0

So soon as the second volume of the Capital62 will go in print—but this will hardly be before the end of 1879—you shall get the manuscript in the way demanded.

I have received some publications from Petersburg, for which my best thanks.365 Of the polemics of Tschischerin and other people against me, I have seen nothing, save what you sent me in 1877 (one article of Sieber, and the other, I think, of Michailoff,d

both in the Fatherlandish Annals,e in reply to that queer would-be

[^1]: a Presumably a reference to Danielson's letter of 7 March 1877. - b simplify - ' See this volume, p. 346. - d Nikolai Mikhailovsky - e Omev.ecmeen HUH 3anuc Ku.



Encyclopedist—Mr Joukowski). Prof. Kowalewskiy, who is here, told me that there had been a rather lively polemics on the Capital.™

[The]a English crisis which I predicted on p. 351 of the French edition, note—has at last come to a head during the past few weeks. Some of my friends—theoreticians and businessmen—had asked me to omit that note because they thought it unfounded. So convinced were they that the crises in the north and south of America and those in Germany and Austria were bound, as it were, to 'cancel out' the English crisis.

The first country in which business will describe an ascending line is the United States of North America. Only this improvement will there set in under conditions altogether altered—for the worse. The people will try in vain to get rid of the monopolising power and the (as far as the immediate happiness of the masses is concerned) baneful influence of the great compagnies swaying industry, commerce, property in land, railroads, finance—-at an always accelerated rate since the outbreak of the Civil War.453 The best Yankee writers are loud in proclaiming the stubborn fact that, if the Anti-Slavery war has broken the chains of the black, it has on the other hand enslaved the white producers.454

The most interesting field for the economist is now certainly to be found in the United States, and, above all, during the period of 1873 (since the crash in September) until 1878—the period of chronic crisis. Transformations—which to be elaborated did require in England centuries—were here realised in a few years. But the observer must look not to the older States on the Atlantic, but to the newer ones (Ohio is a striking example) and the newest (California f.i.).

The imbeciles in Europe who fancy that theoreticians like myself and others are at the root of the evil, might learn a wholesome lesson by reading the official Yankee reports.

You would much oblige me by some information which you as a banker must possess—on the present state of Russian finance.

Yours very truly,

[^1]: A. W.b

[^2]: First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908

[^3]: Printed according to the original

[^4]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^5]: a The passage from here to the words 'Only this improvement' was written in French in the English original. - b A. Williams (Marx' pseudonym).



