---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "242. Engels to Ernst Dronke. 19 November "
Page_Range: "374-375"
---

# 242. Engels to Ernst Dronke. 19 November 



**[p. 242]**

ENGELS TO ERNST DRONKE

IN LIVERPOOL

[Copy]

[London,] 19 November 1878

My dear Dronke,

I wrote to you in the beginning of this month 15 to inform you that I had been legally advised that the policy you deposited with me as security2 was no security whatever unless assigned to me by Mrs Dronke, and that therefore I had instructed my solicitors to draw up a form accordingly.

On the 10th I informed you15 that this form had been handed to Messrs Whitley and Maddock, solicitors, 6 Water St., Liverpool, and requested you to call and examine it.

I have not had a reply from you to either of these communica- tions, and am now informed that up to the 17th at least you had not called at Messrs Whitley and Maddock.

As none of my letters have been returned to me by the post, I must conclude that they have reached you. However to make matters sure, I have requested Messrs Whitley and Maddock to have this letter delivered at your house. It is needless for me to repeat that unless the above documents are signed and in my hands on the morning of the 23th inst. at latest, I shall decline paying the payment then due.

Your truly

F. E.

London, 19 November 1878

To E. Dronke The assignment of Policy

[^1]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Reproduced from the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, _, , ,. , , . _ ,. , . Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 165, 171.



