---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "244. Engels to Erns t Dronke. 29 November "
Page_Range: "376-377"
---

# 244. Engels to Erns t Dronke. 29 November 

The crisis and ensuing work stoppages, the closure of factories and bankruptcies * proceed boisterously in the industrial counties, but here at London, in order not to frighten the general public, the newspapers do their best to hush these unpleasant but stubborn 'incidents'. One reading only the London money articles gets indeed but very scanty information.

Yours most sincerely,

A. Williams*3

First published abridged, in Russian, in Printed according to the original Minuvshiye gody, No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908 and in full, in German, in Die Briefe Published in English for the first von Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels an t i m e

Danielson, Leipzig, 1929

244

ENGELS TO ERNST DRONKE

IN LIVERPOOL

London, 29 November 1878

My dear Dronke,

I hear from Messrs Whitley and Maddock that you informed them of your intention rfbt to have the assignment of the Policy executed. Moreover I have not had a word of reply or explanation from yourself. Under these circumstances I can only again repeat, that the Policy belongs to Mrs Dronke.and that you had no right whatever to dispose of it. It is therefore no security for me unless assigned by her in the form prescribed by law. Unless this is done, I shall know how to qualify the transaction, and of course shall not pay any premium to keep it in existence.

Yours truly

[^1]: [Draft]

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels,

[^3]: Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964

[^4]: Reproduced from the original

[^5]: Published in English for the first time

[^6]: a Marx's pseudonym - b See this volume, p. 345.



