---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "247. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 30 January "
Page_Range: "379-381"
---

# 247. Engels to Johann Philipp Becker. 30 January 



**[p. 350]**

1879

246

MARX TO HUGO HELLER459

[IN OXFORD]

[Extract]

[London,] 29 January 1879

Dear Friend,

 You would oblige me by copying for me verbatim the passage in Busch [OR Buret?]a in which I am taxed with the bad taste of having preserved the life of the Champagne phiz460

247

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

London, 30 January 1879

Dear Old Man,

It hardly needed a postcard from you for me to bestir myself on your behalf.461 From a friend in Manchesterb I have received one pound to be used for victims of the Anti-Socialist Law.462 I could not put it to better use than by passing it on to you, and I have

[^1]: First published, in the language of the Printed according to the catalogue original (German), in the catalogue Sotheby Parke Bernet and C°, London, 1963 Published in English for the first time

[^2]: IN GENEVA

[^3]: a The words in square brackets were added by the compiler of the catalogue presumably because the name was illegible in the original. - b Probably Carl Schorlemmer.





**[p. 351]**

also added a second, for which you should get a remittance of 50 frs 40 from Basle and get it, probably, the day after you receive this letter. I have retained the receipt. Anything more that can be done later on, will be done.

As to agencies, there's nothing doing.3 Business here is absolutely rotten, and no one wants to take any chances.

So far as the Précurseur is concerned, I would, if I were you, tell the people in Geneva once and for all that I was not in a position to pay out anything whatever in respect of the paper. It is a crying shame. Not only do you take upon yourself all the worry and the work, getting nothing in return, but on top of that you are expected to cough up the expenses. But the Genevans have always been like that. Ever since Calvin and his predestination,463 they have regarded themselves as the chosen people and expected everything to fall into their laps. It was thus in the case of the Egalité, when Utin had to supply both the work and the cash. It was thus in the case of the great building workers' strike, when the International had to provide the cash,464 but knocked in vain at the Genevans' doors when there were strikes elsewhere.

We were much tickled by the news that, like Achilles, the great Guillaume has withdrawn sulking into his tent.465 This was bound to happen. The anarchists weren't worthy of the name until anarchy broke out in their own midst. Still, Guillaume was at least the great Bakunin's successor—but that an upstart like Brousse should propose to turn the world upside down—why, it's positively ludicrous.

Over here Most is publishing a little sheet, the Freiheit, for the communist Workers' Society55; so far it has sold well.466 We wish it all prosperity but otherwise, of course, have nothing to do with it, nor are we in any way responsible for its contents.

In Germany, by the way, things are going rapidly downhill. A walloping for the Reichstag467—such is the latest and best [piece of news]. Only let it carry on like this, with more and more taxes on top, and the good Bismarck will yet be surprised by his petty bourgeois, who are going to the devil fast enough as it is. Apart from the unavoidable suffering it will bring down upon individu- als, nothing could be of greater advantage to us on the whole than what is now happening. Any harm Bismarck could do us, he has already done; what he is now doing affects our opponents, the petty bourgeois men of Progress,312 and, with time, will also affect the liberal big bourgeoisie.

[^1]: See this volume, p. 348.



