---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "248. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht, i March "
Page_Range: "381-382"
---

# 248. Engels to Wilhelm Liebknecht, i March 

So let him keep it up! And aside from this, affairs in Russia are going ahead splendidly, and that's the main thing. If there's an explosion there, then William,a too, might as well pack his bags.

Your

F. E.

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann ,. , , Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published m English for the first time

248

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 1 March 1879

Dear Liebknecht,

We have again tried to come to an arrangement with The Whitehall Review through Barry, if only in regard to the Reichstag reports, but the jackass insisted on the articles being signed; so we had to give him a flat refusal and let him go. The negotiations lasted a pretty long time and, until matters had reached the stage of oui ou non, there was, of course, nothing we could tell you.

The election in Breslau468 has made a splendid impression here too. Still more, however, the speed with which Bismarck is ruining himself. He really is coming 'one cropper after another'469—going de chute en chute. He has now lost virtually all of his apologists in the English press—even The Times, which was very deeply involved with him, is trying to extricate itself.470 Now that he's become a protectionist, the English, of course, are all the more reluctant to have anything further to do with him. Even in Germany, come to that, a reversion to the protectionist system would be downright reactionary. Still, it's excellent that Monsieur Bismarck should again be drifting towards dissolution.467 Only let him drive the German philistines really wild and even they will lose patience in the end, particularly if their pockets are affected.

[^1]: a William I - b yes or no



