---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "255. Marx to Carlo Cafiero. 29 July "
Page_Range: "394-395"
---

# 255. Marx to Carlo Cafiero. 29 July 



**[p. 365]**

one Kaufmann and others have constituted themselves the central committee of the European-American working men's movement on at least six occasions, but have always been obstinately ignored by the irreverent world. Now they intend to force it through and have discovered an ally in Most. The Freiheit is shouting for revolution by fire and sword which, for the worthy Most, is, of course, a quite unprecedented pleasure in which he could never before have allowed himself to indulge. Moreover, it has grossly exaggerated the goings-on in the Reichstag and made them a pretext for disrupting the party and forming a new one. This is to exploit the present exigency and enforced silence in Germany for the benefit of a few nitwits whose ambition is notably dispropor- tionate to their capabilities—and if, as we have heard, Most has let it be known that he has our support, then he is lying. Since he embarked on this role he's kept well out of sight. Au fond* it's as well that he should unmask himself like this, thus ruining any prospects he might subsequently have in Germany; he is not without talent, but horribly vain, undisciplined and ambitious, and so it Vbetter that he should go and put his foot in it. Come to that, the Freiheit won't, presumably, survive much longer, and then all this will quietly relapse into oblivion.

With most cordial regards from Marx and

Your

F. E.

255

London, 29 July 1879 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. Dear Citizen,

My sincerest thanks for the two copies of your work488! Some time ago I received two similar works, one written in Serbian, the

[^1]: First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann . . Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: MARX TO CARLO CAFIERO487

[^3]: IN NAPLES [Draft]

[^4]: ;1 Really



