---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "256. Engels to August Bebel. 4 August "
Page_Range: "395-397"
---

# 256. Engels to August Bebel. 4 August 



**[p. 366]**

other in English (published in the United States),341 but both of them err in that, by seeking to provide a succinct and popular résumé of Capital, they also devote themselves in too pedantic a manner to the scientific form of the argument. Thus it seems to me that they more or less lose sight of their principal object, which is to make an impression on the public for whom these résumés are intended. And it is here that your work is vastly superior!

As to the concept of the thing, I believe I am not mistaken when I find an apparent gap in the views set out in your preface, which is that there is no proof that the material conditions indispensable to the emancipation of the proletariat are engendered in spontaneous fashion by the progress of capitalist production.3

Moreover, I share your opinion—if I have interpreted your preface aright—that one ought not to overload the minds of the people one is proposing to educate. There is nothing to prevent your making, at the right moment, a further attempt aimed at placing greater emphasis on this materialist basis of Capital.

Once again many thanks.

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

256

London, 4 August 1879 Dear Bebel,

[^1]: First published in La Vie ouvrière, Printed according to the original No. 57, Paris, 5 février 1912

[^2]: Translated from the French

[^3]: Published in English in full for the first time

[^4]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL489

[^5]: IN LEIPZIG [Copy]

[^6]: Since I last wrote on 25 July1'1' Hirsch has informed us of his correspondence with Bernstein and Liebknecht about the new

[^7]: a In the original, the following passage is deleted: 'and the class struggle which finally leads to a social revolution. What distinguishes critical and revolutionary socialism from its predecessors is, in my opinion, precisely this materialist basis. It shows that at a certain stage of historical development the animal inevitably transforms into a man'. - b In the manuscript of the draft: 'which I trust you received (it was registered)'.



paper.490 To judge by this, matters would appear to be materially different from what your letter had entitled us to assume.

Since Hirsch's altogether justifiable inquiries as to what arrange- ments had been made and who would be running the paper, on the one hand financially, on the other administratively, met with no other reply from Liebknecht save: 'the party plus Höchberg',491

and the reiterated assurance that everything was in order—we could only assume, even then, that the paper would be financed by Höchberg and that the 'we' to whom, according to E. Bern- stein's letter, 'the production and supervision' would be en- trusted,492 would, once again, be Höchberg and his secretary Bernsteine

From Bernstein's second letter to Hirsch just received, it transpires that such is indeed the case.493

You will not, I presume, fail to perceive that the errors against which I warned in my last [letter] will now almost inevitably form an intrinsic part of the paper. Höchberg has shown himself to be exceedingly muddle-headed in matters of theory and, in practice, impelled by an irresistible urge to fraternise with all and sundry who profess to be, not merely socialist, but also and even simply social. He showed his true colours in the Zukunft, discrediting the party both as regards theory and in practice.

What the party needs above all is a political organ. And really Höchberg is at best a wholly unpolitical man, not even a social democrat, but a social philanthropist. Nor, according to Bernstein's letter, is the paper to be in the least political, but socialist on principle, which, in such hands, necessarily means social-fantastic, a new edition of the Zukunft. A paper of this kind would represent the party only if the latter were willing to degrade itself and become a mere appendage to Höchberg and his armchair socialist friends. If the party leaders were really to try and bring the proletariat under the leadership of Höchberg and his ambiguous friends, the workers would be unlikely to go along with them;

[^1]: 11 The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'That C. Hirsch cannot assume the editorship in these circumstances without quite specific guarantees of his independence vis-à-vis his superior on the financial side, goes without saying. I doubt very much whether sufficient guarantees of this kind could be given, and regard it as fairly certain that the negotiations with C. Hirsch will come to nothing. But even were they to succeed, it is virtually certain that Hirsch's position would ultimately become untenable through his being controlled by two superiors of whom one, who provides the finances, is not a social democrat but a social philantropist. and the other, as Liebknecht admits, "would himself like to be editor".'



