---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "257. Marx to Rudolph Meyer. 7 August "
Page_Range: "397-398"
---

# 257. Marx to Rudolph Meyer. 7 August 

dissension and disorganisation would inevitably result; but Most and the ranters over here would experience their greatest triumph.

In these circumstances, which were quite unknown to us when I wrote my last letter, we believe that Hirsch is absolutely right in refusing to have anything to do with the matter. The same applies to Marx and myself. Our consent regarding contributions was given in respect of a genuine party organ and hence was applicable only to such — not, however, to a private organ of Mr Höchberg's masquerading as a party organ. To that we would in no circumstances contribute.3 Marx and I therefore specifically ask that you should kindly ensure we are not named as contributors.

First published in Die Kommunistische Printed according to the copy Internationale, Heft 23, Berlin, 1931 checked against the manuscript of the draft

Published in English for the first time

257

MARX TO RUDOLPH MEYER

[London,] 7 August 1879

Dear Mr Meyer,

I am today sending you your Gründer" PER BOOK-POST. My departure494 was held up as a result of Longuet's having fallen ill: he is feared to have gastric fever, and we shall probably hear today what the verdict is. If the thing's serious I shall have to abandon the trip to Jersey (which I wanted to visit because the place is new to my companion — my youngest daughter0) and go to a seaside resort near London. I shall be going to one of these in

[^1]: IN LONDON

[^2]: a The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'We shall continue to correspond with C. Hirsch and shall see what can be done if he accepts the editorship. As circumstances are now, he is, of all possible editors, the only one in whom we would have sufficient confidence.' - b R. Meyer, Politische Gründer und die

[^3]: Corruption in Deutschland. - c Eleanor Marx



