---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "258. Marx to Engels. 14 August , "
Page_Range: "398-400"
---

# 258. Marx to Engels. 14 August , 



**[p. 369]**

any case, even after my return from Jersey, along with Madame Lafargue and my grandson,3 and look forward to your visiting me there.

Should anything unforeseen happen to precipitate your depar- ture, perhaps you would be so kind as to return the volumes of periodicals (the Leipzig and Paris ones), at the same time letting me know (all letters will be forwarded to me from my house) whether the January issue (1879) of the Osterreichische Monatsschrift für Gesellschaftswissenschaften was followed by a second.

With best wishes for your future, and cordial regards from my wife and my daughter, Eleanor,

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx

First published in Die Rote Fahne, Printed according to the original Nr. 294, Berlin, 14. Dezember 1928, r , .. Beilaee Published in English for the first time

258

St Aubin's, 14 August 1879 Trafalgar Hotel

Dear FRED,

Herewith letter from Hirsch to m e * ditto letter from Louise Juta to Pumps.

Our crossing from Southampton to Jersey494 was made al- together too watery by a tremendous downpour of rain; we arrived dripping wet at St Hélier where it was also 'pouring' hard. Since then the weather, after occasional vacillations and transitions and set-backs, has been very good. The farmers in Jersey thought

[^1]: MARX TO ENGELS495

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: I am sending this note to your London address since—to go by your letter to my wife 15—there is no knowing that you will still belong to the population of Eastbourne after today. 96

[^4]: a Jean Longuet





**[p. 370]**

the end of the world was at hand; they maintain that they've never had such a bad spring and summer. Tomorrow we are moving to the Hôtel de l'Europe, St Hélier. We are leaving our present lodgings in St Aubin's because Tussy and I cannot stand the monotonous daily fare of lamb or MUTTON in consequence of which I have, during the past few days, become an involuntary VEGETARIAN. We could find nowhere else to stay—we spent a great deal of time hunting r o u n d — i n these parts. When we arrived in Jersey, it was still comparatively empty, but as time went on there was immigration on a massive scale, notably of FRENCHIES. When we made inquiries at the Hôtel de l'Europe this morning, it so happened, fortunately for us, that 60 French people were just getting ready to leave, whereas on the other hand the STEAMERS laden with fresh h u m a n scum had not yet come in.

O n leaving London from Waterloo Station, we met Harney, who was seeing his wife off to Jersey. Luckily she already had a first class TICKET, whereas we were travelling second. On the BOAT we met again. Like us, she is not prone to SEASICKNESS, but was in other respects unwell. O n landing we again went our different ways, but she gave us the address of her brother with whom she is staying. Since then, we have paid a short visit of 'condolence'. T h e woman is utterly IMPRACTICABLE. Although a native of Jersey, she can provide no information other than what may be found in the GUIDE. A good woman, but not JUST THE PERSON for such as are travelling for recreation. I have been at long last sleeping properly here, only I have not quite shaken off a cold caught as a result of the abominable weather. But in this mild climate it will no doubt soon disappear of its own accord. Tussy ALL RIGHT.

Two Derbyshire farmers, father and son, were until recently our companions at table in the Trafalgar Hôtel. T h e day before yesterday they went on a sailing trip to St Malo and, having 'been to France' for the first time in their lives, returned with an immoderately inflated opinion of themselves. T h e father even felt half-inclined to go with his son on a TRIP to the MEDITERRANEAN, but thought it would be 'too hot' there. 'BY NO MEANS,' said his son, who is the BOOK-LEARNED man of the two, 'BY NO MEANS, THERE IT IS NOW—WINTER!' I was likewise informed by the old man (who is, by the by, in his prime and A SHARP FELLOW, WITH THE TRUE BUSINESS EYE) that St Malo was situated on the south-west coast of France. O n the other hand, both are well-versed in the sphere of agriculture and other FARMERS' QUESTIONS.

Tussy finds that bathing presents no difficulties worth mention- ing, and has so far been bathing alternately in St Brelade's Bay

