---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "259. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 19 August "
Page_Range: "400-401"
---

# 259. Marx to Jenny Longuet. 19 August 

and St Hélier's Bay, and now alternately in the latter and St Clement's Bay.

From my wife's letter, I see that Schorlemeyer was ill when he arrived; I hope to have better news of him soon.

Since my arrival here I haven't looked at any newspapers, have read nothing at all save Carleton's Traits and Stories of the Irish Peasantry, FIRST VOLUME. It was hard enough work, getting through the first volume; the second I shall save up for better times. They are UNCONNECTED TALES in which Irish peasant life is portrayed now from this angle now from that—hence not suitable for consump- tion all at one go. For that very reason it's a book one ought to buy and own in order to regale oneself à fur et mesure* now with one dish, now with another. Carleton is neither a good stylist nor a good compiler, but his originality consists in the fidelity of his descriptions. As the son of an Irish peasant, he knows his subject better than any Levers or Lovers.

With kindest regards from Tussy and self to all of you

Your

Moor

First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

259

St Hélier, 19 August 1879 Hôtel de l'Europe

My dear beloved Jennychen,

Long live the little citizen of the world! 4" II faut peupler le monde de garçons d'autant plus que la statistique anglaise montre un excès de filles. I'm glad that the catastrophe has proceeded auspiciously so far, though unfortunately under somewhat difficult circumstances. The ARRANGEMENT made by Mamma strikes me as being * far from

[^1]: MARX TO JENNY LONGUET498

[^2]: IN RAMSGATE

[^3]: a by degrees - b It's as well to stock the world with boys, particularly since statistics in England show a surplus of girls.

[^4]: 26-4Ü6



