---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "260. Engels to Marx. 20 August "
Page_Range: "401-403"
---

# 260. Engels to Marx. 20 August 



**[p. 372]**

and everything will be quietly settled. Here the rainy time— otherwise so unknown to this delicious island—has again set in, so that we had already commenced discussing our departure, the whole aspect of our sojourn here having changed with the climatic and météorologie changes.

The Hôtel de l'Europe is excellent and one day we must go here together, toute la famille.

I can hardly expect to-morrow morning when the boat will start from here to Southampton. I feel so anxious with you and little Johnny.

In the meantime my best compliments to Mamma and Longuet.* Just don't fret or worry, my child, everything will turn out all right.

Your trusty

OLD NICK*

You must excuse the brevity of this note, the reason being that the letter has to be posted at once.

260

ENGELS TO MARX

Eastbourne,496 20 August 1879 53 Grand Parade

Dear Moor,

I return herewith the letters from Hirsch,497 ditto one from Liebknecht which I have just answered.501 I've drawn his attention to his strange contradictions, viz.:'you wrote to Hirsch saying that the paper was backed by "the party+Höchberg", which must

[^1]: First published, in the languages of the Printed according to the original original (German, French and English), in Annali, an. I, Milano, 1958

[^2]: IN ST HÉLIER«M

[^3]: a jocular name for Marx





**[p. 373]**

surely mean, if Höchberg is in any way a plus, his purse, for in other respects he's a negative quantity. You now write and tell me that Höchberg hasn't contributed a penny. Maybe somebody can make sense of that, I GIVE IT UP.' Also that it was absurd to say that Hirsch had 'misinterpreted' Bernstein's letter492 'in an even sillier way', since that letter admitted of no misinterpretation at all, Bernstein having plainly made himself out therein to be the effective head of the editorial board. Naturally, I went on, Liebknecht believed that he had arranged everything for the best, but Hirsch was entitled to see for himself and Liebknecht was preventing him from doing so by withholding the relevant material; so if Hirsch were to refuse, it would be Liebknecht's fault. 'As for ourselves, this much is certain: If Hirsch does not accept, we shall have to consider very carefully what we should do; we certainly shan't take the bait without knowing who in fact "The Party" is that is backing the paper.'490 For it was precisely now, I told him, when all the rotten and conceited elements were able to push themselves to the fore without let or hindrance, that the time had at last come to abandon a policy of dissimulation and conciliation and even, if necessary, to be undeterred by a few rows and rumpuses. A party that would sooner let itself be hoodwinked by any and every blockhead, rather than summon up the courage to disavow him in public, might as well pack up. E.g. Kayser.502

The Lafargues have been here since Monday" and are staying until the day after tomorrow; we shall see if we can keep Laura here a few days longer. She brought us news that Jenny's catastrophe had gone off all right in Ramsgate,499 as probably everyone, apart from herself and Longuet, had predicted. Otherwise everything there seems to be going on as well as can be expected.

Since yesterday the weather has been very uncertain, which isn't particularly good for Jollymeier; he had pretty well recovered, fever gone, appetite restored, little pain, but there's now been some kind of check and his improvement is no longer so rapid, though so far he's not actually any worse. Today we had the regatta, on which occasion some rain is de rigueur.b As you are further to the south-west and nearer the Atlantic, I'm afraid you are getting it worse and more at first hand.

Also enclosed an embarrassed letter from Bernstein which I have not yet answered. It would be best if you kept everything

[^1]: 1S August - b inevitable

[^2]: 26*



