---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "261. Engels to Marx. 25 August "
Page_Range: "403-405"
---

# 261. Engels to Marx. 25 August 



**[p. 374]**

until further notice; there's no hurry about Bernstein and the noble Jahrbuch can remain quietly in London until I arrive.503

From Schorlemmer's point of view, it's a good thing that we stayed here and, indeed, shall be staying here at any rate until the 28th; what happens then will depend on his condition and, of course, the weather. If possible, a few days in the Isle of Wight and places nearby.

Old Ruge, in the youthful guise of a NIGGER3 SERENADER, has been trotting round the pier today selling programmes for a fireworks' display.

Lafargue and Laura send their love and join us in hoping that you are all still keeping well. Best wishes from Pumps and me to Tussy and you.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 n m e

261

ENGELS TO MARX

Eastbourne, 25 August 1879 53 Grand Parade

Dear Moor,

I hope you got my letterb sent to the Hôtel de l'Europe, St Hélier, together with an enclosure from Liebknecht to me and a letter (returned) from Hirsch to you.

In the meantime Hirsch has been arrested in Paris and after two days in detention he was compelled to leave the country. He is in London, staying with Lessner. 04 Yesterday I got from him a whole parcel of correspondence to do with the newspaper affair490; very interesting. In my view he has acted quite correctly. (He knew my

[^1]: IN RAMSGATE500

[^2]: a See p. XXVIII of the Preface. - b See previous letter.



address, as I had sent him a few excerpts, omitting anything offensive, from the letter of Liebknecht's I passed on to you.)D°5

I've just received 1. a letter from Höchberg in Scheveningen and 2. one from Bebel,506 the purpose of both being to induce us to contribute. There's no hurry about a reply as Vollmar, the editor taken on in place of Hirsch, won't be out of jug for another three weeks! A really excellent prelude, this.

I'd send you the whole bag of tricks if I was sure of your address. According to your wife it is 62 Plains of Waterloo, while Laura maintains it's 71. As soon as I know for certain where you are, I'll send you the lot. What an unholy muddle these people have again got themselves into. Liebknecht, Bebel, Viereck, Höchberg, Schramm, Bernstein, they all of them write something different and there's nothing but confusion and contradiction. So all we can do is wait, and at least there'll be no need for us to be disturbed by this business during our holiday.

I wrote at once to Hirsch l D and told him I'd be back in London next Thursday.3

You will in the meantime have heard from the Lafargues that they have been here. Unfortunately the weather wasn't up to much.

How's Jenny getting on? As well as could be expected, according to the last news I got from your wife. I hope this is still the case. Give her my love and congratulate her on her strapping boy.b Your refound ability to sleep will, I trust, continue, thereby removing the chief obstacle that prevents you feeling really fit. Let's hope the Ramsgate weather will suit your wife too. Jollymeier is much better, but the changeable weather is a sharp reminder to him that something is still slightly amiss between muscles and joints. Pumps is ALL RIGHT; as usual sea-bathing is doing me a power of good; I think I'm getting properly fat.

If you don't write tomorrow, then better [write] to London. The postal facilities here are antediluvian; a letter posted on Wednes- day would not arrive until after our departure.

Best wishes to all of you, and see to it that Jenny doesn't take it upon herself to return home too soon. How long are you staying there?

Your

F. E.

[^1]: a 28 August - b new-born son, Edgar Longuet



