---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "262. Marx to Engels. 25 August "
Page_Range: "405-407"
---

# 262. Marx to Engels. 25 August 



**[p. 376]**

Do you have Kovalevsky's London address, or can I get it from Tussy?

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

262

MARX TO ENGELS507

IN EASTBOURNE496

Ramsgate, 25 August 1879 62 Plains of Waterloo

Dear FRED,

My letter from Jersey12 and yours from Eastbourne" have evidently crossed.

Last Wednesday,0 the very day after we had heard by telegraph of the catastrophe at Ramsgate, we left for London first thing in the morning. For Tussy's sake I was sorry to cut short her stay in Jersey but knew that, for various reasons, my presence had become necessary in Ramsgate. I arrived there on Thursday amidst thunder, lightning and torrents of rain. On Friday it was fine, on Saturday IT RAINED DOGS AND CATS from morn till night, fine again yesterday, outlook uncertain today. Place is full of Jews and fleas.

The main thing is that Jennychen has got safely through the 9 critical days and, CONSIDERING THE CIRCUMSTANCES, is reasonably well. For the time being she is feeding the baby herself; most desirable that she should go on being able to do so. My wife is making slow progress but is better nonetheless.

My head's not quite ALL RIGHT yet. Yesterday, by way of a test, I glanced at certain mathematical notebooks I had brought with me, but very soon had to abandon the premature JOB which was done only as a—TEST.

I have not taken and am not taking sea baths, but only warm sea baths; for in consequence of the frightful weather when we

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 372-74. - b 20 August





**[p. 377]**

arrived in Jersey, my throat trouble got worse and was com- pounded by a sudden toothache, neither being quite gone yet, although much alleviated, and only reminding me by an occasional twinge that they are still lurking in the background.

Hirsch is in London3; he had left his visiting card at my house, but I had no time to look him up (he's staying with Lessner) because of my abrupt departure from London. The enclosed letter from Kaub will inform you* of the very odd circumstances attending Hirsch's renewed expulsion from Paris.

I hope that there has been an improvement in Schollymeyer's condition. Kindest regards to him and Pumps to whom in addition Johnny asks to be specially recommended.

Have you read Allman's—or whatever he's called—inaugural speech? It's something I would have been capable of myself, a l t h o u g h NO MAN OF SCIENCE.

Adio, OLD BOY.

Your

Moor

Wright, the head of the Massachusetts LABOR STATISTICS BUREAU, has sent me the complete set of REPORTS FROM 1874 to 1879 (so doesn't know about Harney's earlier consignments), together with the compendium of the Massachusetts Census, and has, at the same time, written to say THAT 'HE SHALL BE PLEASED, IN FUTURE, TO SEND YOU

Such 'politesses' come to us only from Russia and the UNITED STATES.

[^1]: OUR PUBLICATIONS AS SOON AS ISSUED'.

[^2]: Dana, my old patron, CALLED LAST FRIDAY13 AT Maitland Park, Tussy

[^3]: SENT ME HIS CARD.

[^4]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931

[^5]: ;> See this volume, p. 374. - b 22 August



