---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "263. Engels to Marx. 26 August "
Page_Range: "407-408"
---

# 263. Engels to Marx. 26 August 



**[p. 263]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN RAMSGATE 50°

Eastbourne,496 26 August 1879 Dear Moor,

Have at last got your letter3 and, with it, your exact address which I needed if I was to send you all the rubbish ad vocemh

party organ.490 Since, for Hirsch's sake, I couldn't put off replying to Höchberg, I wrote him the enclosed note,c which is unlikely to gratify him.

As you will see from Bebel's letter it contains exactly the same arguments as Liebknecht used in his last letter.501 From this it may be deduced that Liebknecht has not shown him my last letter509

although expressly instructed by me to do so. I now intend, as soon as you have sent the stuff back to London, 1. to instruct Bebel to make sure that letter is shown to him, so that he may see that all this palaver has already been answered, 2. to set out side by side for his benefit all the contradictions contained in the various letters written to C. Hirsch, so that he may see what a beastly mess they've gone and made of things again with their free and easy ways. If this is put to him properly, Bebel is, I think, just the man to take advantage of it. I shall, of course, first submit the letter to you for approval, likewise to Hirsch, cujus res agitur.d

We were all very glad to hear that Jenny is doing well. I altogether agree that, if at all possible, she should go on feeding the child herself,499 give up the School177 and thus at last rid herself of the BOTHER with NURSES and SERVANTS, the root of that trouble being after all her constant and enforced absence from home. As for you and your wife, you must stay at the seaside for just as long as you possibly can. You both have a lot of leeway to make up and ought not to come back until your head and her digestive organs have again condescended to function pretty well normally. It's not as though there's any hurry now and, besides, the weather is gradually becoming, if not brilliant and settled, at any rate more changeable in a nicer way than of late. It seems much the same where you are as it is here. Jollymeier would be ALL RIGHT if he could have a week of constant sunshine.

I hope, when I again see Tussy, to find her in an improved state

[^1]: a See previous letter. - b re - c See next letter. - d who is the interested person



