---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "264. Engels to Karl Höchberg. 26 August "
Page_Range: "408-409"
---

# 264. Engels to Karl Höchberg. 26 August 



**[p. 379]**

of health as a result of sea bathing. If you'd only written and told us, she could have come over here on Saturday" and gone on bathing until the day after tomorrow! In the event, it wasn't till Sunday morning that I learned from the Lafargues that you were in Ramsgate and not where she was at all.

By the way, my three weeks at the seaside have nothing like satisfied me, I'm chewing over all manner of plans for the time when Jollymeier, whom London will probably suit better than the sea, is once again fit to travel. Do you think it would be a good idea if, in about 14 to 18 days' time a n d WEATHER PERMITTING, we three were to shake off the Eternal-Feminine b for once a n d go and play at being BACHELORS somewhere or other for a week or two?

Warmest regards from all of us to all of you.

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

264

ENGELS T O KARL H Ö C H B E R G

Eastbourne, 26 August 1879

Dear Mr Höchberg,

As I do not know how long you will be staying in Scheveningen, I hasten to advise you in reply that you have been misled in regard to the information allegedly given us by C. Hirsch. H e did not assure us that the new newspaper 0 was to be 'your private property', or that it was to 'adopt a moderate attitude'.511 O u r view of the affair is based, not upon Hirsch's assurances, but upon o u r

[^1]: IN SCHEVENINGEN510

[^2]: a 23 August - b From the final couplet of Goethe's Faust: 'The Eternal-Feminine entices us on'. - c Der Sozialdemokrat



