---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "265. Marx to Engels. 27 August "
Page_Range: "409-410"
---

# 265. Marx to Engels. 27 August 



**[p. I]**

appraisal of all the relevant correspondence conducted between Leipzig and Zurich on the one hand and C. Hirsch on the other. I must refrain from going into the whole comedy of errors these letters represent, and in which nobody has been more blameless than Hirsch. In my view his conduct in the whole affair has been perfectly rational, frank and honourable. Hence must wholeheartedly approve of his decision to refuse the editorship on the terms mooted which have not yet even been settled between the interested parties in Leipzig and Zurich, and at this juncture my only concern is to deflect from him a reproach he does not deserve.

With Social-Democratic greetings,

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels

Back in London as from day after tomorrow 496

First published, in Russian, in Marx- Printed according to the original Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), Moscow. jqgq Published in English for the first time

265

MARX TO ENGELS

Ramsgate, 27 August 1879 62 Plains of Waterloo

Our letters keep crossing. No doubt you will have had mine (posted last Monday11); yours — of 25 Augusth—together with enclosures safely received.

I am only writing a line or two, as my wife is having to go somewhere near the post office, so you will get this acknowledge- ment of your letter before you leave.

[^1]: IN EASTBOURNE496

[^2]: DEAR FRED,

[^3]: I enclose for the amusement of yourself, Jollymeyer and Pumps, a letter from Tussy to my wife. PLEASE RETURN- IT AT ONCE AFTER PERUSAL.

[^4]: See this volume, pp. 37(>-77. - '' Ibid., pp. Ü74-76.



