---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "267. Marx to Engels. 3 September "
Page_Range: "411-412"
---

# 267. Marx to Engels. 3 September 



**[p. 382]**

PLEASE RETURN THE M O S T LETTER. Yesterday evening, after the rain had stopped, we took Johnny3

down to the beach. * Some people said: 'That little boy looks like a prince.' Johnny turned fiercely round and retorted: 'I look like a little Jollymeyer!'

From a letter received from the house Lafargue I see that the other Meyer b—not the Jollymeyer—had another scene at Lafar- gues. Poor fellow! *

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the f.rst Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t i m e

267

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 3 September 1879 62 Plains of Waterloo Dear Engels,

Meyer (R.) wrotec and announced his intention of visiting me, while at the same time saying, on the other hand, that I was to let him know, i.e. telegraph him, 'DO NOT COME', should I be otherwise engaged. FIRSTLY, therefore, I telegraphed him in the 'negative', secondly, however, proceeded to write him a letter 2 * to this effect, that in consequence of Mrs Marx's bad health my whole time is taken up 'presently'*. I am telling you this in order that you may know how things stand, should he raise the matter with you. In fact my wife is IMPROVING only very slowly and hence BY NO

How is Jolly getting on?

Your

Moor

[^1]: MEANS ANXIOUS TO SEE MEYER HERE.

[^2]: Jennychen had her first outing today, a fifteen minute walk499;

[^3]: SHE PROGRESSES FAVOURABLY.

[^4]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Printed according to the original Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 , Published in English for the first time

[^5]: a Jean Longuet - b Rudolph Meyer - c on 29 August 1879



