---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "270. Engels to Marx. 9 September "
Page_Range: "414-417"
---

# 270. Engels to Marx. 9 September 



**[p. 269]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 9 September 1879 62 Plains of Waterloo

Dear FRED,

Various INCIDENTS have meant that money is visibly running out, whereas I wish to spend another week here,"'00 despite the weather which, since Sunday evening, has been very uncertain.

You will hear more about our sojourn here, which has done me, in particular, a great deal of good, from the Lafargues.

Enclosed a letter from Sorge. Since I haven't got Becker's address with me, and you are corresponding with him anyhow, PLEASE write and tell him to send me the form for the power of attorney*

How are things with Jollymeyer?

Your

K. M.

270

ENGELS TO MARX

London, 9 September 1879

Dear Moor,

Herewith something from Liebknecht, together with enclosures, in which there would appear to be little that is new, which is why I have been in no hurry to send them. For obvious reasons I have

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abi. Ill, Bd. 4, Primed according to the original Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: IN RAMSGATE s0°

[^4]: See ihis volume, pp. 392-93.





**[p. 386]**

told Hirsch nothing about all this stuff, it being better to avoid unnecessary rows.

Höchberg has written to Hirsch from Scheveningen, virtually asking him to invite him over here and assure him of a good reception, to which Hirsch hasn't deigned to reply. On receiving a further postcard from Höchberg, Hirsch sent him a ditto, saying you weren't back yet and he himself, Hirsch, was likewise about to leave for the coast. So we probably shan't be bothered by the man.

Meanwhile it might be a good thing if you were to return the documents to me. I really ought to reply to Bebel at long last506

1. on account of Hirsch, who would like to see his personal business clarified vis-à-vis Bebel and is getting a bit impatient and

2. because by good fortune the Jahrbuch Kovalevsky brought you will enable us quite simply to give the chaps definite reasons why it's absolutely impossible for us to contribute to an organ in which Höchberg has any say at all. The articles concerned are:

1. 'Rückblicke auf die sozialistische Bewegung in Deutschland' by * » (Höchberg and, probably, Bernstein and Lübeck),513

2. Critiques by C. L. (Lübeck), notably of Cohn's 'Was ist Sozialismus'? concluding part,

3. Report from Germany No. 1 by M. Sch. (Max Schlesinger in Breslau).b

Höchberg declares outright that the Germans made a mistake when they turned the socialist movement into a mere workers' movement and, by unnecessarily provoking the bourgeois, drew down upon themselves the Anti-Socialist Law462! The movement ought, he says, to be placed under the direction of bourgeois and educated elements, its character to be wholly that of peaceable reform, etc. You can imagine with what GUSTO Most embraces these lamentable propositions, and once again makes himself out to be the genuine representative of the German movement.514

Enfin,c I believe—and no doubt you will share my opinion— that, after this business, we would be well-advised to establish our standpoint—vis-à-vis the Leipzigers, at least. If the new party

[^1]: a See Lübeck's reviews of the following books: C. F. W. Walther, Kommunismus und Sozialismus, St. Louis, 1878; G. Cohn, Was ist Sozialismus?, Berlin, 1878; J. B. Meyer, Fichte, Lassalle und der Sozialismus, Berlin, 1878; C. Frantz, Der Föderalismus als leitendes Prinzip für die soziale, staatliche und internationale Organisa- tion, Mainz, 1879. In: Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik. Zürich- Oberstrass, 1879. - b M. Schlesinger],'Bericht über den Fortgang der sozialistischen Bewegung: Deutsches Reich, I'. In: Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, Zürich-Oberstrass, 1879. - c In short





**[p. 387]**

organ plays the same tune as Höchberg, we might be compelled to do so publicly as well.3

If you will let me have the things (I've still got one copy of the Jahrbuch here), I will draft a letter to Bebel and send it to you; needless to say, there's no need for you to interrupt your holiday on account of this trifle. But something has got to be done soon, otherwise Hirsch will again start writing private letters to all and sundry, thus lending the affair much too exclusively a personal character.

Ever since Russian diplomacy has had to allow events inside Russia dictate its goals, everything's been going wrong for it. At the very time when nihilists and pan-Slavs are so thoroughly demolishing its German alliance13 that any apparent patching-up can at most be short-lived, at this same time, its agents in Afghanistan are driving England—in the event of war with Germany—into the arms of Bismarck. Bismarck, I am sure, is doing everything he can to bring about war with Russia. In concert with Austria and England, he could risk it all right: England would ensure Denmark's neutrality, probably Italy's and maybe even that of France. But it would be better if things were to come rapidly to a head in Russia, and the prospect of war be eliminated by an internal upheaval. The position is beginning to favour Bismarck too much. A simultaneous war against Russia and France would become a struggle for national survival and the resulting outburst of chauvinism would put paid to our movement for years to come. And on top of that, the odds would be greatly in Bismarck's favour the moment England acceded: a long, hard fight, but at 3:2 the eventual outcome would be much as in the Seven Years' War.318

Sam Moore writes to say that the sale of the ESTATE has so far been going very well, most of it having been sold for 39-40 times the amount of the gross rent; nothing remains unsold but the moors and woods which they assess at £11,600, including stocks of timber, and think they can hang on to until business improves in Sheffield, when they might succeed in getting a better price.

What has become of the Lafargues? Since Pumps went to see them a week ago on Fridayc we've neither heard nor seen anything of Paul.

jollymeier is still tinkering away at his rheumatism which refuses to budge. Gumpert advised him to go to Buxton and yesterday he said that, unless it gets better soon, he would go there at the end

[^1]: •' Sec this volume, pp. 394-408. - b Ibid., p. 384. - '• 5 September

[^2]: 27-406



