---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "271. Marx to Engels. 10 September "
Page_Range: "417-419"
---

# 271. Marx to Engels. 10 September 



**[p. 388]**

of the week. He, Pumps and I send you all our cordial regards and trust that life at the seaside is doing you good. What are your plans about coming back500? Put it off as long as you possibly can; what with the changeable weather, I know what will happen once you're back here—nowt as anyone could wish for.a

Your

F. E.

First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published m English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

271

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 10 September 1879 62 Plains of Waterloo DEAR FRED,

Yesterday I got a note from Kovalevsky saying he had had a letter from Russia which necessitated his immediate return to the land of his birth. He didn't send me the Jahrbuch}

Laura spent a week with us, and Paul a few days every now and again; the day before yesterday he returned with her to London. Laura, by the by, had let Pumptia know she was leaving.

My wife is still making very slow progress; I have got much better.500 The air down here suits me extraordinarily well. Besides, I was kept in mouvement perpétuel by Laura.

Herewith the letters received from you today. (The others will go off at the same time, but under separate cover.) Liebknecht has no discernment. The letters prove what they are intended to refute, namely our original view that the business was bungled in Leipzig, whereas the men in Zurich proceeded in accordance with the terms prescribed for them.490 Incidentally, their HORROR at the attack made by the otherwise so innocuous Laterne on that scoundrel Kayser519 shows more clearly than anything else what is the calibre of these chaps. Schramm, though a sound man in other

[^1]: a Engels used a dialectal expression here: es is nix zu wolle. - b See this volume, p. 386. - c perpetual motion





**[p. 389]**

respects, has always been a philistine. The Leipzigers for their part are already so 'parliamentarily minded' that they regard criticism of one member of their Reichstag coterie as a crime de lèse majesté.

I altogether agree with your view that no further time should be lost in stating our views, forcibly and ruthlessly, as to the Jahrbuch bunkum,513 i.e. pro nunc* 'presenting' it to the Leipzigers in black and white. Should they proceed to go ahead with their 'party organ' in this way, we shall have to disavow them publicly. In such matters, the line has to be drawn somewhere.

I haven't replied to Most,b nor shall I do so; as soon as I'm in London I shall write, inviting him to turn up in person. You ought to be present at the meeting.

The most typical thing about Bismarck is the way in which he came to be at odds with Russia. He wanted Gorchakov removed and Shuvalov put in his place. Since this miscarried, the obvious conclusion was—voilà l'ennemi!c And you may be pretty sure that Bûcher did not fail to exacerbate his master's irritation. On retourne toujours à son premier amour.d From the point of view of our movement and of Europe generally, nothing could be more injurious than the implementation of Bismarck's plan. So long as old Williame is alive, this won't be so easy; it might always happen that Bismarck himself falls victim to the reaction he sparked off with the Anti-Socialist Law.462 En attendant,1 the black cloud 32° in the east is already doing him a service; once again he is the 'man they need' and the liberals now feel it to be their 'patriotic' duty to kiss his arse. Not only will the iron military budget be renewed at the next sitting of the Reichstag; it might be 'perpetuated', as William originally wished. The secret of Russian diplomacy's success ABROAD was the deathly silence OF RUSSIA AT HOME, the spell being broken by the movement in that country. Its final victory was the Treaty of Paris of 1856.32' Since then, nothing but blunders.

Your

Moor

[^1]: I HOPE POOR SCHOLLYMEYER'S HEALTH WILL IMPROVE. M Y BEST WISHES FOR HIM.

[^2]: First published abridged in Der Briefwech- Printed according to the original sei zwischen F. Engeis und K. Marx, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Published in English for the first Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 t l m e

[^3]: a for the time being - b See this volume,p. 381. - c That's the enemy! - d One always returns to one's first love (somewhat paraphrased words of a romance from Isouard's opera—libretto by Ch. G. Etienne—Joconde, Act III, Scene 1). - e William I - f Meanwhile

[^4]: 27*



