---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "272. Engels to Marx. 11 September "
Page_Range: "419-420"
---

# 272. Engels to Marx. 11 September 



**[p. 272]**

ENGELS TO MARX

IN RAMSGATE MO

London, 11 September 1879

Dear Moor,

Letters received." Yesterday Hirsch called at my house where he also encountered the Lafargues and Henry Juta; he is going to bring me the stuff I had returned to him earlier on, and then I shall set to work forthwith.0

Laura and Paul, i.e. notably the latter, said they would be coming again next Sunday evening/ Much though we appreciate this, it is a matter that calls for careful consideration on account of Tussy. Since our return, she has been dining with us on Sundays and I shall, needless to say, invite her for next Sunday as well. As Paul had said the Longuets would be returning this week, I had thought of going to see Jenny tomorrow or the day after and asking her to help me out of this quandary by taking over Tussy for the evening. But on leaving, Laura said that Jenny wouldn't be back till Saturday, and so I have no other recourse than to contrive things in this way. If it's feasible, let me know at once; if not, some other way out must be found. The Lafargues never arrive before 7 o'clock.

Your

F. E.

[^1]: Kindest regards. For three days now Jollymeier has been much better—Buxton probably not necessary.d

[^2]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931

[^3]: Published in English tor the first time

[^4]: a See this volume, p. 388. - b Ibid., p. 389. - ' 14 September - d See this volume, pp. 387-88.



