---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "273. Marx to Engels. 11 September "
Page_Range: "420-421"
---

# 273. Marx to Engels. 11 September 



**[p. 273]**

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Ramsgate,] 11 September 1879 62 Plains of Waterloo

DEAR FRED,

Letter and enclosure3 received with many thanks. The Longuet family will be 'making' for London, as Lessner puts it, on Saturday (next).b So far all has gone well with Jennychen, although she still has a bit of asthma, but she proposes—obstinately, à la Lupus12—to combine feeding her child d

with teaching.1'7

Yesterday, to my intense surprise, Meyer" suddenly materialised in front of me on the SANDS. TO my relief, he immediately explained that he had taken lodgings for the day in Margate whither he would be returning in a few hours' time, and that all he wanted was to inquire about 'madame V' health, etc. I did the honours of the place for a while and then handed him over to Longuet so that he might speed him on his way. He—Meyer—is going to Edinburgh for the TRADES UNION CONGRESS.522 I'm glad this 'crisis' was so short-lived. The good fellow's tendency towards Ramsgate has been IRREPRESSIBLE. He told Longuet, by the by, that his liver had got much worse so that he could no longer 'take' the accustomed amount of 'spirits' without their going to his head. An attempt, no doubt, to gloss over his recent ACCIDENTS at Maitland Park, etc.

The weather here is partly good and partly bad, the latter having a tendency to predominate.

Your

Moor

[^1]: First published in MEGA, Abt. Ill, Bd. 4, Printed according to the original Berlin, 1931

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: 11 Marx is referring to a cheque (see next letter). - b 13 September - ' Like Wilhelm Wolff - d Edgar Longuet - e Rudolph Meyer - f Jenny Marx



