---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "279. Marx to Friedrich Adolp h Sorge. 19 September "
Page_Range: "439-444"
---

# 279. Marx to Friedrich Adolp h Sorge. 19 September 

You will receive a longer letter so soon as I have disposed of some urgent work accumulated during my absence. In the meantime, with my best wishes

Yours sincerely

A. Williams3

First published, in Russian, in Minuvshiye Reproduced from the original \ No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908 . , . . , r , r. Published in English for the first time

279

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE41

IN HOBOKEN

London, 19 September 1879 41 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill, N. W.

Dear Friend,

It was not till the day before yesterday that I got back to London after a seven-week stay, first in Jersey and after that in Ramsgate. But I had at least made provision that business matters and commissions contained in your letters be immediately attended to by Engels. However, I have not yet had from old Beckerb the form for the power of attorney which you want me to sign, and which Engels asked him to send me.c As soon as the thing arrives I'll fill it in.348 My LONG RUSTICATION was due to my nervous condition—(complicated by the fact that, because of Bismarck, Karlsbad has been inaccessible to me for the past two years)—which has latterly made all brain work virtually 'unfeasible'. But I'm much better now.

The new edition of Weitlingd hasn't reached me. The only American journal I am sent is the by no means very substantial Paterson Labor Standard. The things you sent last, Labor Bureau

[^1]: a Marx's pseudonym - b Johann Philipp Becker - c See this volume, p. 393. - d The new edition of Weitling's Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit came out in New York in

[^2]: 1879 under the title Des seligen Schneider's Weitling Lehre vom Sozialismus und Communismus.



Statistics of Pennsylvania, Ohio and Massachusetts, received with thanks (likewise Steward's speech). I am delighted that the CHIEF of the Massachusetts Bureau,3 as he tells me in a letter, should from now on be sending me the PUBLICATIONS direct (also the census) immediately they come out.b

As for Most and Co., our attitude towards them is a 'passive' one, i.e. we maintain no sort of relations with them, although I do see Most himself from time to time at my own house. To say that Engels and I had made any kind of 'statement' condemning Most or the Freiheit is a lie on Mr Lübeck's part. According to a letter Engels received from little Jew Bernstein in Zurich, Most had written to Switzerland and Germany claiming he had our support. To this Engels replied that if Bernstein could adduce any proof of this, he would make a public statement refuting these untruths.0

But Bernstein (nephew of the Berlin rabbi Rebenstein, of the Berlin Volks-Zeitung) was IN FACT unable to adduce an atom of proof. Instead he confided the bogus secret to that jackass Lübeck who, with the usual discretion of such PENNY-A-LINERS, sold it forthwith to the United States.

The issues upon which we differ from Most in no way tally with those of the gentlemen in Zurich, the trio 'Dr Höchberg- Bernstein (his secretary)-and C. A. Schramm'. Our complaint against Most is not that his Freiheit is too revolutionary; our complaint is that it has no revolutionary content, but merely indulges in revolutionary jargon. Again, our complaint is not that he criticises the party leaders in Germany, but, in the first place, that he kicks up a row in public instead of telling these men what he thinks in writing, as we do, i.e. by letter; in the second, however, that he merely used this as a pretext to make himself look important and to disseminate the silly secret conspiracy-mongering of Messrs Weber ju Nio Rd and Kaufmann. Long before his arrival these laddies had felt it was their vocation to take the 'general working men's movement' under their august wing and, in their numerous attempts to realise this 'gracious' venture, had gone plotting and scheming all over the place. The good John Most, a man of the most childish vanity, actually believes that, because the self-same Most is no longer domiciled in Germany but in London, the whole world has been turned upside down. The man's not without talent, but he kills what he has by writing so profusely. Moreover, he has no

[^1]: 11 Carroll Davidson Wright - b See this volume, p. 377. - c Ibid., pp. 362-63. - «' Ibid., pp. 364-65.





**[p. 412]**

esprit de suite.3 With every change of wind he turns now this way, now that, like a weathercock.

However, things might well come to such a pass that Engels and I would feel compelled to issue a 'public statement' against the Leipzigers and their allies in Zurich.

This is how matters stand. Bebel wrote telling us that they intended to found a party organ in Zurich b and asked that we lend our names to it as contributors. Hirsch was named as putative editor. Whereupon we accepted and I wrote to Hirsch n (then in Paris, from which he has since been expelled for the second time504), telling him to accept the editorship since he alone could give us the guarantee that the kind of graduate, undergraduate, etc., rabble and armchair socialist riff-raff who had filled the columns of the Zukunft, etc., and were already invading those of the Vorwärts, were fended off and the party line rigorously adhered to. But now it transpired that Hirsch had unearthed a hornets' nest in Zurich. The five men, Dr Höchberg (who used his money to buy his way into the party, a cousin of Sonnemann's, the sentimental drooler), little Jew Bernstein, his secretary, C. A. Schramm, philistine, if a well-meaning one, and Leipzig's emissary, Viereck (also a philistine lout, natural son of the German Emperor') and a Berlin businessman, Singer (petty bourgeois, paunch, called on me a few months ago); these five men constituted themselves—by supreme authority of the Leipzigers— a constituent committee and appointed an administrative committee in Zurich, also responsible for supervising the editorial side and consisting of the trio «*, (Höchberg-Bernstein-C. A. Schramm) which was to decide in the first instance, but must defer to a court of the last instance composed of Bebel, Liebknecht and a few other German leaders. Well, what Hirsch wanted to know first was whom the money was coming from; Liebknecht wrote, saying from the 'party+Dr Höchberg'; Hirsch deducted the rhetorical flourish and reduced this quite correctly to 'Höchberg'. Secondly, Hirsch did not wish to subordinate himself to the trifolium Höchberg-Bernstein-C. A. Schramm, in which he was the more justified for having received from Bernstein, in reply to a letter asking for information, a bureaucratic dressing down,493

condemning his Laterne for— mirabile dictu A—being ultrarevolution- ar), etc. After protracted correspondence, in which Liebknecht played a by no means brilliant role, Hirsch withdrew; Engels wrote

[^1]: :l sense of logic. - b Der Sozialdemokrat - '- William I - d wonderful to relate





**[p. 413]**

to Bebel saying that we, too, would withdraw," just as, from the very start, we had refused to contribute to the Zukunft (Höch- berg)313 and the Neue Gesellschaft (Wiede).296 These laddies, nonentities in theory and nincompoops in practice, are seeking to draw the teeth of socialism (which they have rehashed in accordance with academic formulae) and of the Social-Democratic Party in particular, to enlighten the workers or, as they put it, to provide them, out of their confused and superficial knowledge, with educative elements' and, above all, to make the party 'respectable' in the eyes of the philistines. They are poor counter-revolutionary windbags. WELL. The weekly organ is now appearing (or is to appear) in Zurich, under their supervision and the general supervision of the Leipzigers. (Editor, Vollmar.)

In the meantime Höchbergb came over here to rope us in. He found only Engels who, in a critical discussion of the Jahrbuch Höchberg had brought out (under the pseudonym Dr L. Rich- ter), showed him how deep was the gulf between him and us. (Have a look at the lamentable concoction: the article signed with 3 * is the triumvirate Höchberg-Bernstein-C. A. Schramm.013) (But the good John Most also figures therein, in the sycophantic article about that quill-pusher Schaffte.0) Never has anything more discreditable to the party appeared in print. What a lot of good Bismarck did, not to himself but us, by imposing silence on Germany and thus giving these laddies a chance of making themselves plainly heard. Höchberg came down to earth with a bang after Engels had given him a piece of his mind; he's a partisan of 'peaceable' development and, in point of fact, expects proletarian emancipation to be achieved solely by 'educated bourgeois', i.e. people like himself. After all, hadn't he been told by Liebknecht that au fondd we were all of us agreed, that everyone in Germany—i.e. all the leaders — shared his view, etc.?

In fact Liebknecht, having made the tremendous blunder of treating with the Lassalleans, flung wide the door to all these demi-men and thus, malgré lui,1' paved the way for demoralisation within the party which could be eliminated only by the Anti-Socialist Law.462

Now should the 'weekly'—the party organ — in fact go ahead along the lines laid down in Höchberg's Jahrbuch, we shall be compelled to make a public protest against this debauching of party and theory! Engels has written a circular (letter) to Bebel,

[^1]: •' See this volume, pp. 366-68. - b Ibid., p. 393. - ' See Most's review of Schäffle's book Bau und Leben des sozialen Körpers, Bände III-IV, Tübingen 1878, in the Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik. Zürich-Oberstrass, 1879. - d at bottom - '' despite himself



etc.3 (just for private circulation among the German leaders, of course), in which our point of view is plainly set forth. So the gentlemen are forewarned and, moreover, are well enough acquainted with us to know that this means bend or break! If they wish to compromise themselves, tant pish\ In no circumstances shall we allow them to compromise us. To what depths they have already been brought by parliamentarianism will be evident to you from the fact that they impute it a dire crime in Hirsch to have—what?—handled that scoundrel Kayser somewhat roughly in the Laterne, on account of his disgraceful speech regarding Bismarck's customs legislation Dl9\ But, or so they now maintain, the party, i.e. the handful of the party's parliamentary representa- tives, had authorised Kayser to speak as he did. More shame to that handful! But even this is a pitiful evasion. In fact they had been silly enough to allow Kayser to speak for himself and in the name of his constituents; he, however, spoke in the party's name. Be that as it may; they are already so far infected with parliamentary cretinism as to believe themselves above criticism and to denounce criticism as a crime de lèse majesté!

As regards the Communist Manifesto, nothing has so far been done because now Engels, now I, had not enough time.148 But it must at long last be proceeded with.

I hope that your next letter will bring reassuring news as to the health and prosperity of you and yours. MEANWHILE—my wife sends her most cordial regards—I remain,

Yours very truly,

Karl Marx

John Most wrote and told me about Lübeck's tittle-tattle in the Chicago paper.512 I didn't reply; but now that I'm in London, I shall ask him to come and see me in person, and shall tell him what I think by word of mouth.

Hirsch has been here since his expulsion from Paris. I haven't seen him yet since he could not, of course, have found me at home while I was away.

I am using a 'registered' envelope only because I could find no other and yet wanted to avoid any further delay.

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Published in English in full for the Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 f l r s t t l m e

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 394-408. - b so much the worse



