---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "283. Engels to August Bebel. 14 November "
Page_Range: "445-451"
---

# 283. Engels to August Bebel. 14 November 



**[p. 282]**

MARX TO BERTHA AUGUSTI , 6

IN KOBLENZ

[London,] 25 October 1879

Dear Mrs Bertha,

I have a (tiresome) visitor sitting next to me, but do not wish to miss the opportunity of telling you in all haste how grateful I am to you for the pleasure afforded me by reading your novel in the

Kölnische." Great talent is discernible by all, but the achievement is particularly surprising to one who is aware of the confined and cloistered conditions in which you work. Moreover I would take the liberty of adding that I am a great heretic as far as German novels are concerned, think nothing of them and have been greatly spoiled by the best French, English and Russian novelists. Hence it was also with my habitual mistrust that I embarked on the reading of your Verhängnisvolles Jahr.

Wishing you all prosperity,

Most cordially yours,

Karl Marx

283

Dear Bebel,

Many thanks for your communications, as also those of Fritzsche and Liebknecht,338 which have at last enabled us to get a clear idea of the facts.

[^1]: First published in Beiträge zur Geschichte Printed according to the original der deutschen Arbeiterbewegung, Nr. 5, Ber- lin, 1966

[^2]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL485

[^3]: IN LEIPZIG

[^4]: London, 14 November 1879537

[^5]: 11 B. Augusti, Ein verhängnisvolles Jahr. In: Kölnische Zeitung, Nos. 247-302, 6 Sep- tember^ 1 October 1879.



That things have not, from the start, been exactly straightfor- ward, however, is evident from earlier letters from Leipzig and the muddles and misunderstandings with Hirsch generally.3 The latter could not have happened if, from the start, the Leipzigers had put paid to Zurich's pretensions to censorship. Had they done so and informed Hirsch of the fact, everything would have been all right. But since they didn't, I can only conclude, after again comparing commissions with omissions, present communications with previ- ous letters from all concerned, that Höchberg wasn't altogether wrong when he told me that Zurich had imposed censorship solely on Hirsch's account, it being unnecessary in the case of Vollmar.

As regards the financing,11 I'm not particularly surprised that you should take matters so lightly. For this is the first time you've had a go at the thing. But Hirsch had already been through this particular mill with the Laterne and, as for us, who have so often witnessed such things and even experienced them in person, we can only endorse his request that careful consideration be given to this point. Freiheit, despite all subsidies, is left at the end of its third quarter with a deficit of £100=2,000 marks. I have never known a German paper, banned at home, that could have survived without substantial subsidies. Do not allow yourselves to be dazzled by initial successes. The real difficulties involved in smuggling become manifest only with time, and multiply con- stantly.539

What you say about the attitude of the deputies and of the party leaders generally to the protective tariffs question corroborates every word of my letter/ It was bad enough, in all conscience, that a party which prides itself on being so superior to the bourgeois in the sphere of economics should, when first put to the test in that sphere, prove just as divided, just as ignorant, as the National Liberals040 who could at least plead a genuine clash of bourgeois interests in extenuation of their inglorious collapse. But it was even worse that that split should have been seen to happen, that your attitude should have been wavering and uncertain. Once you

[^1]: a The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'If the Zurich trio had no pretensions to censorship, why were those pretensions, which were so loudly and insistently voiced by them, not immediately quashed by Leipzig? Only two things were needed to induce Hirsch to go to Zurich: 1. Information about the true facts of the case, such as we have now had, 2. Notification to the effect that we, the Leipzigers, have written to the Zürichers telling them that they are not to inter- vene officially in the editorship, and, if they nevertheless do so, you must take no notice; you are responsible to us and to us alone'. - '> of the newspaper Der Sozial- demokrat - ' See this volume, pp. 400-01.



knew that unity was unattainable, there was only one thing to do—declare the question to be a purely bourgeois question, which indeed it is, and abstain from voting.3 But the worst thing of all was permitting Kayser to make his lamentable speeches and to vote for the Bill at its first reading. It was not until after that division that

Hirsch attacked him,019 and if Kayser later, at the third reading, voted against the Bill, he only made matters worse, not better.

The resolution in congress is no excuse.541 If the party proposes to regard as binding all the earlier resolutions made by congress in the easy-going days of peace, it will be placing itself in fetters. The constitutional basis upon which a living party functions must not only be self-created, it must also and at all times be susceptible to change. Inasmuch as the Anti-Socialist Law462 makes congresses and hence the amendment of earlier congressional resolutions impossible, it also abolishes the binding force of those resolutions. A party that is deprived of the opportunity of passing binding resolutions can only look for its laws to its living and ever changing needs. But if it seeks to subordinate those needs to earlier resolutions that are now dead as a doornail, it will be digging its own grave.

So much for the formal aspect. However, it is the content of that resolution that really invalidates it. In the first place it is incompatible with the programme in that it admits of voting indirect taxation. Secondly it is incompatible with essential party tactics inasmuch as it permits taxation to be voted for the present-day state. Thirdly, however, it implies, translated into plain language:

The congress admits to not being well enough informed about the question of protective tariffs to pass a definite resolution, for or against. Hence it declares itself incompetent in this matter, inasmuch as it restricts itself, for the benefit of the dear public, to the enunciation of a few commonplaces, some of them meaning- less, some incompatible either with each other or with the party programme, and then proceeds gladly to wash its hands of the whole affair.

And is this declaration of incompetence whereby what was, in peace-time, a purely academic question was swept under the carpet,—is this declaration,b now that, in time of war, the question

[^1]: a The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'to invoke the point in the programme that rejects all indirect taxation and the tactics which prohibit voting this government any taxes, and to adopt as the sole precept abstention from voting'. - h In the manuscript of the draft: 'this wretched piece of trash'.



has become a burning one, to be considered as binding upon an entire party until legally invalidated by a new resolution which present circumstances preclude?

This much is certain: whatever the impression made on the deputies by Hirsch's attacks upon Kayser, those attacks reflect the impression made by Kayser's irresponsible action upon Social- Democrats abroad, whether German or non-German. And it is high time it was realised that the reputation of the party has to be kept up, not only within its own confines, but also in the eyes of Europe and America.

And this brings me to the report.542 However good it may be at the start and however skilful—in the circumstances—the treat- ment of the protective tariffs debate, this does not atone for the concessions made to the German philistines in the third part. Why the altogether superfluous passage about 'civil war', why such deference to 'public opinion' which, in Germany, will always be that of the beer-swilling philistine; why, at this point, the total obliteration of the movement's class character? Why give the anarchists that pleasure? And, what is more, all these concessions are utterly useless. The German philistine is cowardice incarnate; he has no respect for anyone who does not inspire fear in him.a

But anyone who tries to curry favour with him he regards as one of his own kind and accords him no more respect than he accords to his own kind, which is to say none at all. And now that the storm of beer-swilling philistine indignation known as public opinion has, as is generally admitted, died down and the burden of taxation has in any case reduced these people to pulp, why go on with this billing and cooing? If only you knew what it sounded like abroad! It's a good thing for a party organ to be managed by men immediately involved in the party and the struggle. But were you to spend only six months abroad, you would feel quite differently about this quite uncalled-for self-abasement of the party deputies before the philistines. The storm that broke over the French socialists after the Commune was, after all, a very different kind of thing from the uproar about Nobiling406 in Germany. And how much prouder and more self-confident was the bearing of the French! Where, in their case, may such weaknesses, such kow-towing to opponents, be discerned? They remained silent when they could not speak freely, they let the

[^1]: a The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'Bismarck treats him as he deserves, i.e. spurns him, and he therefore idolises Bismarck.'

[^2]: 29-406



philistines shout till they could shout no more, they knew their time would surely come, and now it is here.

I can well believe what you say about Höchberg. Indeed, I have absolutely no objection to him as a private individual. I also believe that it was only the anti-socialist campaign that made him realise what, in his heart of hearts, he wanted. That what he wanted was bourgeois and not proletarian was something I tried — probably in vain—to make him see.3 But once he had formulated a programme, I must have credited him with more than German philistine weakness had I assumed that he would not try to gain recognition for it. Höchberg before and Höchberg after that article*13 are, indeed, two different persons.b

But now, in No. 5 of the Sozialdemokrat, I find a contri- bution from the Lower Elbec in which Auer uses my letter as a pretext to accuse me—without mentioning my name but leaving small room for doubt—of 'sowing the seeds of suspicion in regard to the trustiest comrades', i.e. of calumniating them (for otherwise I should be perfectly justified in so doing).e Not content with that, he falsely attributes to me things as stupid as they are infamous, and which were not contained in my letter at all. Auer, or so it would seem, supposes that / want something or other of the party. But as you know, it is not / who want anything of the party; on the contrary, it is the party that wants something of me. As you and Liebknecht know, all I have ever asked of the party is that it should leave me in peace so that I can complete my theoretical works.169 You know that, for the past sixteen years, I have nevertheless been approached over and over again with the request that I write for party organs, and that I have actually done so, that I have written whole series of articles, entire pamphlets at Liebknecht's express behest—such as The Housing Question and Anti-Diihring. I won't go into details about the kindnesses the party has bestowed on me in return — e.g. the agreeable transac- tions in congress on the subject of Diihring.286 Again, you know that Marx and I have voluntarily conducted the defence of the party against its opponents abroad throughout the party's exis- tence, and that we have never asked anything of the party in return, save that it should not be untrue to itself.

[^1]: a See this volume, pp. 393, 413. - b The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'at least so far as the party is concerned'. - c [I. Auer,] 'Von der Niederelbe, 23. Oktober', Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 5, 2 November 1879. - d See this volume, pp. 394-408. - e The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'I have no intention of discussing Auer's attack, as stupid as it is infamous and provoked. I should, however, remark that Auer appears to imagine'



But if the party asks of me that I should contribute to its new organ,3 it is only to be expected that it should at least ensure that, while negotiations are still in progress, I should not be calum- niated as a calumniator in the self-same organ and, what is more, by one b of its nominal co-proprietors. There is, so far as I am aware, no literary or other code of honour to which this would conform, and I believe that even a reptile408 would not stand for such treatment. Hence I must ask you:

1. What satisfaction can you proffer me for this unprovoked and rotten insult?

2. What guarantees can you offer that nothing of the kind will ever happen again?

For the rest, all I want to say about Auer's insinuations is that we over here underestimate neither the difficulties the party has to contend with in Germany, nor the significance of the victories won in the face of them and the hitherto exemplary conduct of the party masses. It goes without saying that every victory gained in Germany gladdens our hearts as much as any gained elsewhere— more so, indeed, seeing that from the very start the German party developed in accordance with our theoretical propositions. But for that very reason we cannot but be particularly concerned that the practical conduct of the German party, and notably the public utterances of the party leadership, should continue to accord with the general theory. Undoubtedly our criticism will be displeasing to some; yet no amount of uncritical praise could, after all, be of such value to the partyc as the presence abroad of a couple of men who, uninfluenced by confusing local conditions and the minutiae of the d struggle, compare from time to time what has been said and what has been done with the theoretical tenets valid for any modern proletarian movement, and in whom that party may see reflected the impression its actions have made outside Germany.

Most cordially yours,

F. Engels

[^1]: First published in: A. Bebel, Aus meinem Printed according to the original Leben, Teil III, Stuttgart, 1914 . Published in English in full for the first time

[^2]: a Der Sozialdemokrat - b Ignaz Auer - c In the manuscript of the draft: 'and to the party leadership'. - d Ibid.: 'practical'.

[^3]: 29*



