---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "284. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 November "
Page_Range: "451-452"
---

# 284. Marx to Friedrich Adolph Sorge. 14 November 



**[p. 284]**

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 14 November 1879 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. Dear Sorge,

I am at last able to send you all the powers of attorney.3 I didn't get the others until the end of the week before last; they arrived when I was confined to the house by a most INFAMOUS cold and then, after that, my worthy SOLICITOR contrived to spin out the affair for another week, and only today did I finally receive my power of attorney. The account both for these and the first one will be sent to you later. The other 3 (or rather 4) powers of attorney will go off to you at the same time as this letter—but under separate* cover.

You will doubtless have got my letterb in which I told you about the latest goings-on in the bosom of the party. Since then Höchberg and his associates0 in Zurich have been removed, at least nominally, from the editorial committee which now sits in Leipzig, while Vollmar functions as editor in Zurich. His paper, Der Sozialdemokrat, isn't worth much. But at any rate all our associates worth mentioning, Liebknecht, Bebel, Bracke, etc., have disowned Dr Höchberg's, alias Richter's, Jahrbuch,5*4 though as yet only—in private.

You will have seen in the papers that the anti-communist gang, composed of very heterogeneous elements, was finally defeated at the Marseilles Congress.

My wife is still dangerously ill and I myself am not yet completely fit.

With kindest regards from my family.

Your

Karl Marx

[^1]: First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the original Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an Published in English for the first F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 t i m e

[^2]: a See this volume, pp. 392-93. - b Ibid., pp. 410-14. - c Eduard Bernstein and Carl August Schramm



