---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "286. Marx to Achille Loria. 3 December "
Page_Range: "455-456"
---

# 286. Marx to Achille Loria. 3 December 



**[p. 426]**

constitutes a danger to the movement, once one forgets not only that these people have got to come, but also that they are coming simply because they have got to. Their joining us proves that the proletariat really has become the leading class. But since the ideas and ambitions they bring with them are those of the petty bourgeois and the peasant, it must not be forgotten that the proletariat would forfeit its leading historical role were it to make concessions to those ideas and ambitions.

Most cordially yours,

F. Engels

Herewith another loose postscript/

First published in: A. Bebel, Aus meinem Printed according to the original Leben, Teil III, Stuttgart, 1914

Published in English for the first time

286

MARX TO ACHILLE LORIA

London, 3 December 1879 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. Dear Sir,

For reasons of health I was compelled to absent myself from London for a time. On my return today I found awaiting me your letter of 23 November and your work.b I hasten to acknowledge receipt and at the same time express my thanks to you.

Yours very truly,

Karl Marx

[^1]: IN MANTUA

[^2]: First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a The postscript is missing in the manuscript. - b A. Loria, La rendita fondiaria e la sua elisione naturale.



