---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "290. Engels to August Bebel. 16 December "
Page_Range: "458-461"
---

# 290. Engels to August Bebel. 16 December 

mainstay of all reaction—the absolute Russian government. And the moral effect of a revolutionary successful movement in Russia upon the masses in Central Europe must be immense.

The worst would be, to us, if Russia, to avoid revolution, launched into foreign war. But so long as they have not the French Alliance, they scarcely venture.

Anyhow, by next spring this Russian crisis, which we think here is the most important one since 1848, must come to a head either one way or another, and I hope you will recover your full strength so as to enjoy the stirring times which are, it appears, still in store for you. . Very faithfully yours

F. Engels

First published in the language of the Reproduced from the original original (English, facsimile) and in Ger- man, in Neues Deutschland, Nr. 107, Berlin 19. April 1970

290

London, 16 December 1879 Dear Bebel,

I find it incomprehensible that Auer should now say he had meant Most amongst others, since in the article he all but specifically excepted him.346 But let it rest at that.

In No. 10 of the Sozialdemokrat there are 'Preßgeschichtliche Rückblicke' which unmistakably stem from one or other of the three asterisks/ Here we read that it can only be an honour for Social-Democrats to be compared with belletrists such as Gutzkow and Laube, i.e. with men who, long before '48, had already laid to rest such political character as they still had left, if indeed they ever had any. Again:

[^1]: ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL127

[^2]: IN LEIPZIG

[^3]: 'The events of 1848 were bound to come, either accompanied by all the blessings of peace, if governments had responded to the demands of the time, or, alas—since they did not do so—the only recourse that remained was violent revolution.'

[^4]: a Karl Höchberg, Eduard Bernstein and Carl August Schramm



In a paper in which it is possible actually to deplore the revolution of 1848 which, for the first time, opened wide the door to Social-Democracy, in such a paper there is no room for us. From this article and from Höchberg's letter, it is plainly evident that the three asterisks claim the right to advocate in the Sozialdemokrat—and this on an equal footing with proletarian views—their own petty-bourgeois socialist opinions first clearly enunciated in their Jahrbuch.513 And, now that things have gone so badly off the rails, I fail to see how you people in Leipzig propose to prevent this without an actual breach. Now as before, you regard these men as party members. We cannot do so. The dividing line created between us and them by the Jahrbuch article is distinct and absolute. We cannot even negotiate with these people so long as they claim to belong to the same party as ourselves. The points that have arisen in this case are ones which no longer admit of being discussed in any proletarian party. To subject them to discussion within the party would mean jeopardis- ing the whole of proletarian socialism.

In these circumstances it might, in fact, be better if we did not contribute. We would be constantly protesting and would, after a few weeks, have to give public notice of our resignation, which would do nothing to promote the cause.

We regret very much being unable, at this time of repression, to give you our unqualified support. So long as the party in Germany remained true to its proletarian character, we were prepared to set aside all other considerations. But now that the petty-bourgeois elements you have admitted have come out in their true colours,3

it's a different matter. The moment they are permitted to insinuate their petty-bourgeois ideas piecemeal into the organ of the German party, that organ, by the same token, is closed to us,b

no more nor less.

The matter of the oath548 is of very little concern to us. It might have been possible, as you yourself wished, to find some other procedure that would to some extent have eliminated the

[^1]: a The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'and claim the right within the party to advocate as socialism their petty-bourgeois hesitations and limitations, it's a different matter. A party to which they belong is no place for us, nor can we even treat with such people so long as they do not constitute themselves an independent petty-bourgeois-socialist faction of the party, or so long as they insist that they belong to the same party as ourselves, we cannot even treat with them.' - b The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'We can- not, and never shall be, able to work hand in hand with petty-bourgeois socia- lism.'



disagreeable impression, but it's of no great moment.556 Discretion shall be observed, as you request.

Malon's journal" might have a salutory effect, for 1. Malon is not the kind of man to do much damage and 2. his collaborators among the French will see to it that the thing is kept on its proper course. If Höchberg imagines it will provide an arena for his petty bourgeoiserie, he'll find that he's thrown his money down the drain.

We were very pleased about the Magdeburg election.554 The staunchness of the working-class masses in Germany is admirable. The letters from working men in the Sozialdemokrat are the only good things in it.

I return herewith Höchberg's letter. The man's completely hopeless. If we refused to do anything in company with the

Zukunft people, this was, it seems, out of personal vanity. But a third of these people's names were, and still are, completely unknown to us, and approximately another third are notorious petty-bourgeois socialists. And a thing like that called itself a 'scientific' journal! And Höchberg still believes it had an 'enlight- ening' effect. Testifies to the much vaunted lucidity of his own intellect which, right up to this very day, and despite my every endeavour, has been unable to grasp the difference between petty-bourgeois and proletarian socialism. All differences of opinion are 'misunderstandings'. Exactly as in the case of the democratic wailers557 of '48. Or else 'over-hasty' deductions. Of course, since any deduction is over-hasty which deduces a speci- fic meaning from the chatter of these gentry. For they aren't just trying to say such and such, but also, as likely as not, the op- posite.

Apart from this, world history proceeds on its course untrou- bled by these philistine advocates of prudence and moderation. In Russia things will surely come to a head within a few months. Either absolutism will be overthrown and then, immediately after the overthrow of that great storehouse of reaction, a new wind will blow across Europe. Or else there will be a European war, and the present German party, too, will be submerged in the inevitable struggle of each individual people for its national existence. A war such as that would, for us, be the greatest of misfortunes; it might set the movement back by twenty years. But the new party that must surely emerge from it at last would, in all European

[^1]: a La Revue socialiste



