---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "292. Engels to Amélie Engel. Around 1879- 1880 "
Page_Range: "463-468"
---

# 292. Engels to Amélie Engel. Around 1879- 1880 

Liebknecht's expectations, of which he always has more than is good for him.

For years Lessner has had nothing much to do with the Society here55; he seldom turns up, and then doesn't do anything much except grumble and grouse about the course of things generally.

In Russia matters are going splendidly! They'll soon come to blows there. And when that happens, the bowels of the great men of the German Empire will instantly turn to water—a veritable flux! That will be the next turning point of world history.

You shouldn't allow the poor anarchists to irritate you so.559

They, too, are in a truly forlorn state. In the West they have nothing left to do save be anarchical amongst themselves and tear one another's hair out, and in Russia all their murderous deeds achieve—as they have just discovered to their dismay—is pulling the Constitutionals'560 chestnuts out of the fire for them!

Regards from Marx and

Your

F. E.

First published in: F. Engels, Vergessene Printed according to the original Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker), Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first time

292

[London, around 1879-1880]

Madame,

Many years of experience have impressed upon me the principle that under no circumstances should one give financial aid to strangers.

Moreover I cannot at this moment raise the sum you want. Were I able to do so, I should be under an obligation to use it, as I do every penny I can spare, for the relief of our German party comrades who are being persecuted by Bismarck.

[^1]: ENGELS TO AMÉLIE ENGEL561

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Draft]





**[p. 435]**

Besides, since you have connections that will procure you audiences with princesses, you are unlikely to experience difficulty in extricating yourself from this momentary embarrassment.

Finally, I cannot refrain from mentioning that, while your visit came as a surprise to me, I have since then been equally certain of receiving a request of the kind contained in your letter.

Yours very truly

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time

[^1]: 30-406





APPENDICES



