---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "2. Eleanor Marx to Carl Hirsch. 25 October 1875 "
Page_Range: "470-471"
---

# 2. Eleanor Marx to Carl Hirsch. 25 October 1875 

ELEANOR MARX TO CARL HIRSCH

IN PARIS

London, 25 October 1875 41 Maitland Park Road Dear Mr Hirsch,

I enclose herewith a short appreciation, written by my mother, of an English actor Mr Irving. Mama would be pleased if you could arrange for its insertion in the Frankfurter Zeitung.565

If he had enough time, Papa would himself have written an appreciation of Mr Irving in whom we are greatly interested (although we do not know him personally). First, because he is a man of exceptional talent and, secondly, because the entire English press, in consequence of the most wretched intrigues, has set about him, and engineered what can only be described as a plot against him. By getting the Frankfurter to print Mama's appreciation, you would be doing us a great service.566

I should also like to ask you on behalf of a friend, a Russian lady, if you think it might be possible to have an appreciation of Mr Irving published in the Journal des Débats," or else in the Temps or Le Siècle.

I very much hope you will forgive me for bothering you like this, but you have so many contacts with the French and German press, and your influence is so great that you are the only person to whom we could turn. I hope that you will excuse me, and not hold it too much against me.

Papa asks me to say how grateful he is to you for the newspapers you were good enough to send him. He also sends his warm regards, as do we all, to our friend Kaub. Mama thanks you in advance and, as for myself, I remain

Yours ever,

Eleanor Marx Mama asks me to say that she does not wish her name to appear in the Frankfurter, but that if you want to say who wrote the appreciation, you may do so 'as between friends'.

[^1]: First published in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French) in Society for the Study of Labour History, Bulletin No. 8, Leeds, 1964 Translated from the French

[^2]: Published in English for the first time

[^3]: a Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires



