---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "4. Eleanor Marx to Carl Hirsch. 25 November 1876 "
Page_Range: "473-474"
---

# 4. Eleanor Marx to Carl Hirsch. 25 November 1876 

our 'beloved fatherland'3 so that we may see all our old comrades again at last. In which case we shall also make a bee-line for Papa Becker. With warmest regards,

Your old friend,

Jenny Marx

First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, , ,. , , . „ ,. , . , .. Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time

ELEANOR MARX TO CARL HIRSCH

IN PARIS

[London,] 25 November 1876 41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

For several weeks past I have been on the point of writing to you — I have actually started a letter on several occasions, but one thing and another always prevents my finishing it.

Just now in particular I have little time, since I am very busy with the election for the 'SCHOOL BOARD'. This committee, which is entrusted with the management of the public schools and with compulsory instruction, is a pretty important one and is chiefly concerned with combatting the so-called 'CHURCH PARTY' which seeks the outright abolition of compulsory instruction. I am working to promote the candidature of a woman—a MRS Westlake—who, though essentially bourgeois like almost all Englishwomen, is at any rate very much a free thinker and worth more than any of the men who are offering themselves as candidates. I go from house to house canvassing votes and you would never believe the comical things I see and hear. At one house they demanded that we teach 'religion above all'—at another I was informed that 'instruction is the curse of the country, that education will be the ruin of us', etc., etc. All in all it is amusing, but also sad at times,when you call on a workman who tells you that he would like to 'consult his employer' first.

[^1]: a Quotation from Max Schneckenburger's poem Wacht am Rhein.



