---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "7. Jules Guesde to Karl Marx. March- April 1879 "
Page_Range: "479-481"
---

# 7. Jules Guesde to Karl Marx. March- April 1879 



**[p. 450]**

nothing but cries of indignation on all sides, cries made more indignant by the fact that the bourgeois are terribly afraid. So if you know anything about Nobiling, write and tell us.

We have seen Mr Zanardelli once or twice. Is he not a little bit of a hothead? I didn't see him long enough to judge, but that is how he struck me.

Lissa[garay] has left for Jersey—before his departure he asked me to send you his best compliments. Papa also sends you a cordial handshake, likewise to Kaub.

Shall we see you soon in London? You really ought to come and spend a few days here.

Yours sincerely,

Eleanor Marx

First published in the language of the Printed according to the original original (French) in Society for the Study of Labour History, Bulletin No. 8, Leeds, 1964 Translated from the French

Published in English for the first time

Paris, [March-April 1879] Hôpital Necker, Rue de Sèvre Very dear Citizen,

I could not be more grateful to you for the sympathy and esteem which you have been kind enough to show me, and I ask you to believe that, for my part, although I find myself in disagreement with you on the subject of the International,5 I have always professed the deepest admiration for the author of the Communist Manifesto* and Capital.

In fact this disagreement, I can say it now, would never have arisen—on my part at least—had I known you better.

For everything that you express in your letter coincides with what I think—and have always thought.

[^1]: JULES GUESDE TO KARL MARX572

[^2]: IN LONDON

[^3]: [Excerpt]

[^4]: K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party.



Like you I am convinced that before thinking of action, one must set up a party, a conscious army, by means of active, continuous propaganda.

Finally, like you I do not believe that the simple destruction of what exists will be enough to build what we want, and I think that for a more or less considerable period the impulse, the direction should come from above, from those who are 'better informed'.2

It is in these conditions that, since my return, I have been busy setting up this 'independent and militant workers' party' which you so rightly declare to be 'of the highest importance' in view of the events which are being prepared.

But for this party to be both 'independent' and 'militant', it is essential that the French proletariat which is to constitute it should be delivered from the dupery of bourgeois Radicalism and that, on the other hand, it should be persuaded that its emancipation can only be achieved through struggle

If I were not so ill — and so poor—I would announce my next visit to you,575 so much would I like to have a long talk with you. But I do not dispose of myself either physically—or pecuniarily. And I must limit myself to sending vou all my thanks and assuring you of my complete devotion

To you and to the Revolution

Jules Guesde

[^1]: First published in full in the language of Printed according to the journal the original French, in Le Combat T r a n s l a t e d f r o m t h e F r e n c h marxiste. No. 19, Pans, mai 193.T

[^2]: •' Here and below Jules Guesde quotes Marx.

[^3]: 31-406



