---
Volume: 45
Document_Title: "8. Marx to Maxim Kovalevsky. April 1879 "
Page_Range: "481-484"
---

# 8. Marx to Maxim Kovalevsky. April 1879 



**[p. 8]**

MARX TO MAXIM KOVALEVSKY576

IN MOSCOW

[London, April 1879]

Mr Kareyev's work 577 is excellent. However, I do not quite share his view of the Physiocrats.260 I take the theory of capital, i.e., of the contemporary structure of society. From Petty to Hume, this theory was developed only piecemeal—a bit here, a bit there— according to the requirements of the period when the author lived. Quesnay was the first to put political economy on its real, i.e., capitalist, basis, and the curious thing is that he did so apparently as a landowner's tenant. Mr Kareyev is definitely wrong in saying that the Physiocrats opposed only one social occupation, namely agriculture, to others, i.e., industry and commerce, but never went, unlike Smith, so far as to oppose social classes to each other. If Mr Kareyev had recalled the main idea of Ricardo's Preface to his famous creation,3 in which he examines three classes of the state (landowners, capitalists, and workers, the latter tilling the soil by their labour), he would have seen that the first invention of the three classes in the economic sphere and their mutual relations could find a place only in the system of agriculture, where Quesnay put it. In addition, a writer should distinguish between what an author really gives and what he gives only in his own imagination. This is true even of philosophical systems; thus, what Spinoza considered the cornerstone of his system and what actually constitutes that cornerstone are two entirely different things. It is not surprising, therefore, that some of Quesnay's adherents, such as Mercier de la Rivière, saw the essence of the whole system in its paraphernalia while the English Physiocrats writing in 1798 were the first to demon- strate—on the basis of Quesnay's concepts and contrary to Adam Smith's — the need to abolish private ownership of land.378

[^1]: First published, in Russian, in the Printed according to the magazine magazine Byloye, No. 20, Lenin- drcirl 1Q99 Translated from the Russian

[^2]: a D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation.



NOTES

AND INDEXES



