---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Preface to the First German Edition "
Page_Range: "19-24"
---

# K. Marx. Preface to the First German Edition 



**[p. 7]**

PREFACE T O THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION

The work, the first volume of which I now submit to the public, forms the continuation of my £ur Kritik der Politischen Oekonomie {A Contribution to the Criticism of Political Economy) published in 1859. The long pause between the first part and the continuation is due to an illness of many years' duration that again and again interrupted my work.

The substance of that earlier work is summarised in the first three chapters of this volume." This is done not merely for the sake of con- nection and completeness. The presentation of the subject-matter is improved. As far as circumstances in any way permit, many points only hinted at in the earlier book are here worked out more fully, whilst, conversely, points worked out fully there are only touched upon in this volume. The sections on the history of the theories of value and of money are now, of course, left out altogether.2 The read- er of the earlier work will find, however, in the notes to the first chapter additional sources of reference relative to the history of those theories.

Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To understand the first chapter, especially the section that contains the analysis of commodities, will, therefore, present the greatest difficulty. That which concerns more especially the analysis of the substance of value and the magnitude of value, I have, as much as it was possible, popu-

[^1]: a The German original has here "in the first chapter", i. e., the first chapter of the first edition. In subsequent editions this was expanded to three chapters, as in the present edition.





**[p. 8]**

With the exception of the section on value form, therefore, this vol- ume cannot stand accused on the score of difficulty. I presuppose, of course, a reader who is willing to learn something new and therefore to think for himself.

The physicist either observes physical phenomena where they oc- cur in their most typical form and most free from disturbing influ- ence, or, wherever possible, he makes experiments under conditions that assure the occurrence of the phenomenon in its normality. In this work I have to examine the capitalist mode of production, and the conditions of production and exchange corresponding to that mode. Up to the present time, their classic ground is England. That is the rea- son why England is used as the chief illustration in the development of my theoretical ideas. If, however, the German reader shrugs his shoulders at the condition of the English industrial and agricultural labourers, or in optimist fashion comforts himself with the thought that in Germany things are not nearly so bad, I must plainly tell him, "De te fabula narraturf" +

[^1]: '' This is the more necessary, as even the section of Ferdinand Lassalle's work against Schulze-Delitzsch, in which he professes to give "the intellectual quintessence" of my explanations on these subjects, contains important mistakes.3 If Ferdinand Lassalle has borrowed almost literally from my writings, and without any acknowledgement, all the general theoretical propositions in his economic works, e. g., those on the historical character of capital, on the connection between the conditions of production and the mode of production, &c, &c, even [down] to the terminology created by me, this may perhaps be due to purposes of propaganda. I am here, of course, not speaking of his de- tailed working out and application of these propositions, with which I have nothing to do.





**[p. 9]**

Intrinsically, it is not a question of the higher or lower degree of development of the social antagonisms that result from the natural laws of capitalist production. It is a question of these laws themselves, of these tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevitable re- sults. The country that is more developed industrially only shows, to the less developed, the image of its own future.

But apart from this. Where capitalist production is fully natural- ised among the Germans (for instance, in the factories proper) the condition of things is much worse than in England, because the coun- terpoise of the Factory Acts is wanting. In all other spheres, we, like all the rest of Continental Western Europe, suffer not only from the development of capitalist production, but also from the incomplete- ness of that development. Alongside of modern evils, a whole series of inherited evils oppress us, arising from the passive survival of antiquat- ed modes of production, with their inevitable train of social and po- litical anachronisms. We suffer not only from the living, but from the dead. Le mort saisit le vif! 5

The social statistics of Germany and the rest of Continental West- ern Europe are, in comparison with those of England, wretchedly compiled. But they raise the veil just enough to let us catch a glimpse of the Medusa head behind it. We should be appalled at the state of things at home, if, as in England, our governments and parliaments appointed periodically commissions of inquiry into economic condi- tions; if these commissions were armed with the same plenary powers to get at the truth; if it was possible to find for this purpose men as competent, as free from partisanship and respect of persons as are the English factory inspectors, her medical reporters on public health, her commissioners of inquiry into the exploitation of women and children, into housing and food. Perseus wore a magic cap that the monsters he hunted down might not see him. We draw the magic cap down over eyes and ears as a make-believe that there are no monsters.

sounded it for the European working class. In England the progress of social disintegration is palpable. When it has reached a certain point, it must re-act on the Continent. There it will take a form more brutal or more humane, according to the degree of development of the working class itself. Apart from higher motives, therefore, their own most important interests dictate to the classes that are for the nonce

[^1]: Let us not deceive ourselves on this. As in the 18th century, the American War of Independence6 sounded the tocsin for the Euro- pean middle class, so in the 19th century, the American Civil War 7





**[p. 10]**

the ruling ones, the removal of all legally removable hindrances to the free development of the working class. For this reason, as well as others, I have given so large a space in this volume to the history, the details, and the results of English factory legislation. One nation can and should learn from others. And even when a society has got upon the right track for the discovery of the natural laws of its move- ment— and it is the ultimate aim of this work, to lay bare the econom- ic law of motion of modern society — it can neither clear by bold leaps, nor remove by legal enactments, the obstacles offered by the successive phases of its normal development. But it can shorten and lessen the birth-pangs.

To prevent possible misunderstanding, a word. I paint the capi- talist and the landlord in no sense couleur de rose. But here individuals are dealt with only in so far as they are the personifications of econom- ic categories, embodiments of particular class relations and class interests. My standpoint, from which the evolution of the economic formation of society is viewed as a process of natural history, can less than any other make the individual responsible for relations whose creature he socially remains, however much he may subjectively raise himself above them.

In the domain of political economy, free scientific inquiry meets not merely the same enemies as in all other domains. The peculiar na- ture of the material it deals with, summons as foes into the field of bat- tle the most violent, mean and malignant passions of the human breast, the Furies of private interest. The English Established Church, e. g., will more readily pardon an attack on 38 of its 39 articles 8 than on 35 of its income. Now-a-days atheism itself is culpa levis,* as compared with criticism of existing property relations. Nevertheless, there is an unmistakable advance. I refer, e.g., to the Blue Book9

published within the last few weeks: "Correspondence with Her Maj- esty's Missions Abroad, regarding Industrial Questions and Trades' Unions". The representatives of the English Crown in foreign coun- tries there declare in so many words that in Germany, in France, to be brief, in all the civilised states of the European Continent, a radical change in the existing relations between capital and labour is as evi- dent and inevitable as in England. At the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, Mr. Wade, vice-president of the United States-

[^1]: a venial sin





**[p. 11]**

declared in public meetings that, after the abolition of slavery, a radical change of the relations of capital and of property in land is next upon the order of the day. These are signs of the times, not to be hidden by purple mantles or black cassocks.10 They do not signify that tomorrow a miracle will happen. They show that, within the rul- ing classes themselves, a foreboding is dawning, that the present so- ciety is no solid crystal, but an organism capable of change, and is constantly changing.

The second volume of this work will treat of the process of the cir- culation of capital1' (Book II), and of the varied forms assumed by capital in the course of its development (Book III), the third and last volume (Book IV), the history of the theory.11

Every opinion based on scientific criticism I welcome. As to the prejudices of so-called public opinion, to which I have never made concessions, now as aforetime the maxim of the great Florentine is mine:

"Segui il tuo cor so, e lascia dir le genti." 12

London, July 25, 1867 Karl Marx

[^1]: "i On p. 564 the author explains what he comprises under this head.



