---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "K. Marx. Afterword to the French Edition "
Page_Range: "36-39"
---

# K. Marx. Afterword to the French Edition 



**[p. 24]**

AFTERWORD TO THE FRENCH EDITION

To the Reader

Mr. J. Roy set himself the task of producing a version that would be as exact and even literal as possible, and has scrupulously fulfilled it. But his very scrupulosity has compelled me to modify his text, with a view to rendering it more intelligible to the reader. These altera- tions, introduced from day to day, as the book was published in parts, were not made with equal care and were bound to result in a lack of harmony in style.

Having once undertaken this work of revision, I was led to apply it also to the basic original text (the second German edition), to sim- plify some arguments, to complete others, to give additional historical or statistical material, to add critical suggestions, etc. Hence, what- ever the literary defects of this French edition may be, it possesses a scientific value independent of the original and should be consulted even by readers familiar with German.

Below I give the passages in the Afterword to the second German edition which treat of the development of political economy in Ger- many and the method employed in the present work.3

Karl Marx London, April 28, 1875

[^1]: See this volume, pp. 13-20.



LE CAPITAL

KARL MARX

[^1]: PARIA

[^2]: t UITF.URS, MAURICE UCHATRE ET C"

[^3]: Cover of the first issue of the French edition of Volume I of Capital

[^4]: Cover of the first issue of the French edition of Volume I of Capital with Marx's dedication

[^5]: to his daughter Jenny Longuet





