---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "1. The Two Poles of the Expression of Value: Relative Form and Equivalent Form "
Page_Range: "70-71"
---

# 1. The Two Poles of the Expression of Value: Relative Form and Equivalent Form 



**[p. 58]**

a value form common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use values. I mean their money form. Here, however, a task is set us, the performance of which has never yet even been attempted by bourgeois economy, the task of trac- ing the genesis of this money form, of developing the expression of value implied in the value relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible outline, to the dazzling money form. By doing this we shall, at the same time, solve the riddle presented by money. The simplest value relation is evidently that of one commodity to some one other commodity of a different kind. Hence the relation be- tween the values of two commodities supplies us with the simplest ex- pression of the value of a single commodity.

A. Elementary or Accidental Form of Value

x commodity A = y commodity B, or x commodity A is worth y commodity B. 20 yards of linen = 1 coat, or 20 yards of linen are worth 1 coat.

1. The two poles of the expression of value: Relative form and Equivalent form

The whole mystery of the form of value lies hidden in this elemen- tary form. Its analysis, therefore, is our real difficulty.

Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example the linen and the coat), evidently play two different parts. The linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the material in which that value is expressed. The former plays an active, the latter a pas- sive, part. The value of the linen is represented as relative value, or appears in relative form. The coat officiates as equivalent, or appears in equivalent form.

The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately con- nected, mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the expres- sion of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, antago- nistic extremes — i. e., poles of the same expression. They are allotted respectively to the two different commodities brought into relation by that expression. It is not possible to express the value of linen in linen.

