---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "3. The Equivalent Form of Value "
Page_Range: "77-82"
---

# 3. The Equivalent Form of Value 



**[p. 65]**

Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither unequiv- ocally nor exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative value. The rela- tive value of a commodity may vary, although its value remains con- stant. Its relative value may remain constant, although its value var- ies; and finally, simultaneous variations in the magnitude of value and in that of its relative expression by no means necessarily corres- pond in amount."

3. The Equivalent form of value

We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing its value in the use value of a commodity differing in kind (the coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific form of value, namely that of the equivalent. The commodity linen manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the coat, without having assumed a value form different from its bodily form, is equated to the linen. The fact that the latter therefore has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly exchangeable with it. Therefore, when we say that a commodity is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is directly exchangeable with other commodities.

[^1]: 1 This incongruity between the magnitude of value and its relative expression has, with customary ingenuity, been exploited by vulgar economists. For example — "Once admit that A falls, because B, with which it is exchanged, rises, while no less labour is bestowed in the meantime on A, and your general principle of value falls to the ground If he [Ricardo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to B, B falls in value relatively to A, he cut away the ground on which he rested his grand proposition, that the value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour embodied in it; for if a change in the cost of A alters not only its own value in relation to B, for which it is ex- changed, but also the value of B relatively to that of A, though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to produce B, then not only the doctrine falls to the ground which asserts that the quantity of labour bestowed on an article regulates its value, but also that which affirms the cost of an article to regulate its value" (J. Broad- hurst, Political Economy, London, 1842, pp. 11 and 14).

[^2]: Mr. Broadhurst might just as well say: consider the fractions j^-, .5, -j^-, &c, the

[^3]: number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, its magnitude re- latively to the numbers 20, 50, 100, &c, continually diminishes. Therefore the great principle that the magnitude of a whole number, such as 10, is "regulated" by the number of times unity is contained in it, falls to the ground.— //The author explains in section 4 of this chapter, p. 91 note 2, what he understands by "Vulgar Economy".— F.E.I I





**[p. 66]**

For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? 2 coats. Because the commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, because the use-value coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an embodiment of value, therefore a definite number of coats suffices to express the defi- nite quantity of value in the linen. Two coats may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, but they can never express the quantity of their own value. A superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation of value, the equivalent figures exclu- sively as a simple quantity of some article, of some use value, has misled Bailey, as also many others, both before and after him, into seeing, in the expression of value, merely a quantitative relation. The truth be- ing, that when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative deter- mination of its value is expressed.

The first peculiarity that strikes us, in considering the form of the equivalent, is this: use value becomes the form of manifestation, the phenomenal form of its opposite, value.

The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value form. But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists in the case of any commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into a value relation with it, and then only within the limits of this relation. Since no commod- ity can stand in the relation of equivalent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into the expression of its own value, every commod- ity is compelled to choose some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept the use value, that is to say, the bodily shape of that other commodity as the form of its own value.

One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material sub- stances, as use values, will serve to illustrate this point. A sugar-loaf



**[p. 67]**

being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: but we can neither see not touch this weight. We then take various pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined beforehand. The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, than is the sugar-loaf. Neverthe- less, in order to express the sugar-loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with the iron. In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing nothing but weight. A certain quantity of iron therefore serves as the measure of the weight of the sugar, and repre- sents, in relation to the sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of man- ifestation of weight. This part is played by the iron only within this relation, into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be determined, enters with the iron. Were they not both heavy, they could not enter into this relation, and the one could therefore not serve as the expression of the weight of the other. When we throw both into the scales, we see in reality, that as weight they are both the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper proportions, they have the same weight. Just as the substance iron, as a measure of weight, represents in relation to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in relation to the linen, represents value alone.

Here, however, the analogy ceases. The iron, in the expression of the weight of the sugar-loaf, represents a natural property common to both bodies, namely their weight; but the coat, in the expression of value of the linen, represents a non-natural property of both, some- thing purely social, namely their value.

Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, for example — expresses the value ofthat commodity, as being some- thing wholly different from its substance and properties, as being, for instance, coat-like, we see that this expression itself indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of it. With the equivalent form it is just the contrary. The very essence of this form is that the material commodity itself—the coat—just as it is, expresses value, and is en- dowed with the form of value by Nature itself. Of course this holds good only so long as the value relation exists, in which the coat stands in the position of equivalent to the linen." Since, however, the prop- erties of a thing are not the result of its relations to other things, but

[^1]: " Such expressions of relations in general, called by Hegel reflex categories,59 form a very curious class. For instance, one man is king only because other men stand in the relation of subjects to him. They, on the contrary, imagine that they are subjects be- cause he is king.





**[p. 68]**

The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, figures as the materialisation of human labour in the abstract, and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful concrete labour. This concrete labour becomes, therefore, the medium for expressing abstract human labour. If, on the one hand, the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of abstract human labour, so, on the other hand, the tailoring which is actually embodied in it, counts as nothing but the form under which that abstract labour is realised. In the expres- sion of value of the linen, the utility of the tailoring consists, not in making clothes, but in making an object, which we at once recognise to be Value, and therefore to be a congelation of labour, but of labour indistinguishable from that realised in the value of the linen. In order to act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect nothing besides its own abstract quality of being human labour gener- ally.

In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour power is expend- ed. Both, therefore, possess the general property of being human la- bour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in the production of value, have to be considered under this aspect alone. There is noth- ing mysterious in this. But in the expression of value there is a com- plete turn of the tables. For instance, how is the fact to be expressed that weaving creates the value of the linen, not by virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of its general property of being hu- man labour? Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of concrete labour (in this instance tailoring) which produces the equivalent of the product of weaving. Just as the coat in its bodily

form became a direct expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodi- ment of human labour generally.

Hence, the second peculiarity of the equivalent form is, that con- crete labour becomes the form under which its opposite, abstract hu- man labour, manifests itself.

But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks as, and is directly identified with, undifferentiated human labour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and therefore with that embodied in the linen. Consequently, although, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the labour of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour directly social in its character. This is the reason why it results in a product directly exchangeable with other commodities. We have then a third peculiarity of the equi- valent form, namely, that the labour of private individuals takes the form of its opposite, labour directly social in its form.

The two latter peculiarities of the equivalent form will become more intelligible if we go back to the great thinker who was the first to analyse so many forms, whether of thought, society, or Nature, and amongst them also the form of value. I mean Aristotle.

In the first place, he clearly enunciates that the money form of com- modities is only the further development of the simple form of value — i.e., of the expression of the value of one commodity in some other commodity taken at random; for he says —

5 beds = 1 house (x^-ivcu icevte àvxi oixiaç)

is not to be distinguished from

5 beds = so much money.

(x Wvcu 7IÉVX8 avxi ocrov ai JIÉVXE x^-îvai)

He further sees that the value relation which gives rise to this ex- pression makes it necessary that the house should qualitatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such an equalisation, these two clearly different things could not be compared with each other as commensurable quantities. "Exchange," he says, "cannot take place without equality, and equality not without commensura- bility" (o Bx' icox Tiç (j.T) O'ÛCTTIÇ ounnexpiaç). Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further analysis of the form of value. "It is, however, in reality, impossible (xfj |iév oùv âX.r|8sia a Süvaxov), that

