---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "4. The Elementary Form of Value Considered as a Whole "
Page_Range: "82-85"
---

# 4. The Elementary Form of Value Considered as a Whole 



**[p. 70]**

such unlike things can be commensurable" — i.e., qualitatively equal. Such an equalisation can only be something foreign to their real nature, consequently only "a makeshift for practical purposes".60

Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value. What is that equal something, that common substance, which admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a house? Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. And why not? Compared with the beds, the house does represent something equal to them, in so far as it re- presents what is really equal, both in the beds and the house. And that is — human labour.

There was, however, an important fact which prevented Aristotle from seeing that, to attribute value to commodities, is merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, and consequently as labour of equal quality. Greek society was founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis, the inequality of men and of their labour powers. The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of labour are equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of human equality has already acquired the fixity of a popular preju- dice. This, however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of the produce of labour takes the form of commodities, in which, consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, is that of owners of commodities. The brilliancy of Aristotle's genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in the expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. The peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived, alone prevented him from discovering what, "in truth", was at the bottom of this equality.

4. The Elementary form of value considered as a whole

The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the equation, expressing its value relation to another commodity of a dif- ferent kind, or in its exchange relation to the same. The value of com- modity A is qualitatively expressed by the fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it. Its value is quantitatively expressed by the fact that a definite quantity of B is exchangeable with a definite quantity of A. In other words, the value of a commodity obtains inde-



**[p. 71]**

Our analysis has shown, that the form or expression of the value of a commodity originates in the nature of value, and not that value and its magnitude originate in the mode of their expression as exchange value. This, however, is the delusion as well of the mercantilists and their recent revivers, Ferrier, Ganilh,1' and others,61 as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of Free-trade,38 such as Bastiat. The mercantilists lay special stress on the qualitative aspect of the expres- sion of value, and consequently on the equivalent form of commodi- ties, which attains its full perfection in money. The modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. For them there consequently exists neither value, nor magnitude of value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange relation of commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current. Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up the confu- sed ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful cross between the superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened Free-trade bagmen.62

A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms of B, contained in the equation expressing the value relation of A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form of A figures only as a use value, the bodily form of B only as the form or aspect of value. The opposition or contrast existing internally in each commodity be- tween use value and value, is, therefore, made evident externally by two commodities being placed in such relation to each other, that the

[^1]: 11 F. L. A. Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes, Du gouvernement considéré dans ses rap- ports avec le commerce, Paris, 1805; and Charles Ganilh, Des Systèmes d'Economie Poli- tique, 2nd ed., Paris, 1821.





**[p. 72]**

commodity whose value it is sought to express, figures directly as a mere use value, while the commodity in which that value is to be expressed, figures directly as mere exchange value. Hence the ele- mentary form of value of a commodity is the elementary form in which the contrast contained in that commodity, between use value and value, becomes apparent.

Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., at the epoch when the la- bour spent on the production of a useful article becomes expressed as one of the objective qualities of that article, i.e., as its value. It therefore follows that the elementary value form is also the primitive form under which a product of labour appears historically as a com- modity, and that the gradual transformation of such products into com- modities, proceeds pari passu* with the development of the value form.

We perceive, at first sight, the deficiencies of the elementary form of value: it is a mere germ, which must undergo a series of meta- morphoses before it can ripen into the price form.

The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any other commodity B, merely distinguishes the value from the use value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of exchange with a single different commodity, B; but it is still far from expressing A's qualita- tive equality, and quantitative proportionality, to all commodities. To the elementary relative value form of a commodity, there corre- sponds the single equivalent form of one other commodity. Thus, in the relative expression of value of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equivalent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation to a single commodity, the linen.

Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy transi- tion into a more complete form. It is true that by means of the ele- mentary form, the value of a commodity A becomes expressed in terms of one, and only one, other commodity. But that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or anything else. There- fore, according as A is placed in relation with one or the other, we get for one and the same commodity, different elementary expressions of value.1 The number of such possible expressions is limited only by the

[^1]: 1 In Homer, for instance, the value of an article is expressed in a series of different things. Iliad, VII, 472-75.

[^2]: a side bv side



