---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value "
Page_Range: "85-86"
---

# 1. The Expanded Relative Form of Value 



**[p. 73]**

number of the different kinds of commodities distinct from it. The iso- lated expression of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged to any length, of the different elementary expressions of that value.

B. Total or Expanded form of value

z Com. A = u Com. B or = v Com. C or = w Com. D or = x Com.

E or = &c. (20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 10 lbs tea or = 40 lbs coffee or =

1 quarter corn or = 2 ounces gold or = Jr ton iron or = &c.)

1. The Expanded Relative form of value

The value of a single commodity, the linen, for example, is now ex- pressed in terms of numberless other elements of the world of commo- dities. Every other commodity now becomes a mirror of the linen's value.11 It is thus, that for the first time, this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of undifferentiated human labour. For the labour that creates it, now stands expressly revealed, as labour that ranks equally with every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, whether tailoring, ploughing, mining, &c, and no matter, therefore, whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. The lin- en, by virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation,

[^1]: l; For this reason, we can speak of the coat value of the linen when its value is ex- pressed in coats, or of its corn value when expressed in corn, and so on. Every such ex- pression tells us, that what appears in the use values, coat, corn, &c, is the value of the linen. "The value of any commodity denoting its relation in exchange, we may speak of it as corn value, cloth value, according to the commodity with which it is compared; and hence there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many kinds of value as there are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and equally nominal" (A Critical Dissertation on the Mature, Measures, and Causes of Value: chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr. Ricardo and his followers. By the author of Essays on the Formation, &c, of Opinions, London, 1825, p. 39). S. Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its day created much stir in England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the various re- lative expressions of one and the same value, he had proved the impossibility of any de- termination of the concept of value. However narrow his own views may have been, yet, that he laid his finger on some serious defects in the Ricardian theory, is proved by the animosity with which he was attacked by Ricardo's followers. See the Westminster Review for example.63



