---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value "
Page_Range: "86-87"
---

# 3. Defects of the Total or Expanded Form of Value 



**[p. 74]**

no longer with only one other kind of commodity, but with the whole world of commodities. As a commodity, it is a citizen ofthat world. At the same time, the interminable series of value equations implies, that as regards the value of a commodity, it is a matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, of use value it appears.

In the first form, 20 yds of linen = 1 coat, it might, for ought that otherwise appears, be pure accident, that these two commodities are exchangeable in definite quantities. In the second form, on the con- trary, we perceive at once the background that determines, and is es- sentially different from, this accidental appearance. The value of the linen remains unaltered in magnitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or iron, or in numberless different commodities, the property of as many different owners. The accidental relation between two in- dividual commodity-owners disappears. It becomes plain, that it is not the exchange of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; but, on the contrary, that it is the magnitude of their value which controls their exchange proportions.

2. The particular Equivalent form

Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c, figures in the expression of value of the linen, as an equivalent, and, consequently, as a thing that is value. The bodily form of each of these commodities figures now as a particular equivalent form, one out of many. In the same way the manifold concrete useful kinds of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now as so many different forms of the realisation, or manifestation, of undifferentiated human labour.

3. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value

In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete be- cause the series representing it is interminable. The chain of which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment to be length- ened by each new kind of commodity that comes into existence and furnishes the material for a fresh expression of value. In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and independent ex- pressions of value. And lastly, if, as must be the case, the relative value of each commodity, in turn, becomes expressed in this expand-

