---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "C. The General Form of Value "
Page_Range: "87-88"
---

# C. The General Form of Value 



**[p. 75]**

ed form, we get for each of them a relative value form, different in every case, and consisting of an interminable series of expressions of value. The defects of the expanded relative value form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form. Since the bodily form of each single commodity is one particular equivalent form amongst number- less others, we have, on the whole, nothing but fragmentary equiva- lent forms, each excluding the others. In the same way, also, the spe- cial, concrete, useful kind of labour embodied in each particular equi- valent, is presented only as a particular kind of labour, and therefore not as an exhaustive representative of human labour generally. The latter, indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its man- ifold, particular, concrete forms. But, in that case, its expression in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity.

The expanded relative value form is, however, nothing but the sum of the elementary relative expressions or equations of the first kind, such as

20 yards of linen = 1 coat 20 yards of linen = 10 lbs of tea, etc. Each of these implies the corresponding inverted equation, 1 coat = 20 yards of linen 10 lbs of tea = 20 yards of linen, etc.

In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other commo- dities, and thus expresses its value in a series of other commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of the latter exchange them for the linen, and consequently express the value of their vari- ous commodities in one and the same third commodity, the linen. If then, we reverse the series, 20 yards of linen = 1 coat or = 10 lbs. of tea, etc., that is to say, if we give expression to the converse relation already implied in the series, we get,

C. The General form of value

1 coat 10 lbs of tea 40 lbs of coffee

1 quarter of corn 2 ounces of gold "2- a ton of iron x com. A., etc.

> = 2 0 yards of linen

