---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "1. The Altered Character of the Form of Value "
Page_Range: "88-90"
---

# 1. The Altered Character of the Form of Value 



**[p. 76]**

1. The altered character of the form of value

All commodities now express their value ( 1 ) in an elementary form, because in a single commodity; (2) with unity, because in one and the same commodity. This form of value is elementary and the same for all, therefore general.

The forms A and B were fit only to express the value of a commo- dity as something distinct from its use value or material form.

The first form, A, furnishes such equations as the following: — 1 coat = 20 yards of linen, 10 lbs of tea = 1/2 a ton of iron. The value of the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. But to be equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as different as are linen and iron.This form, it is plain, occurs practically only in the first beginning, when the products of labour are converted into commodi- ties by accidental and occasional exchanges.

The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner than the first, the value of a commodity from its use value; for the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible shapes with the bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to iron, to tea, in short, to everything else, only not to itself, the coat. On the other hand, any general expression of value common to all is directly exclud- ed; for, in the equation of value of each commodity, all other com- modities now appear only under the form of equivalents. The expand- ed form of value comes into actual existence for the first time so soon as a particular product of labour, such as cattle, is no longer exception- ally, but habitually, exchanged for various other commodities.

The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of the whole world of commodities in terms of a single commodity set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents to us their val- ues by means of their equality with linen. The value of every commo- dity is now, by being equated to linen, not only differentiated from its own use value, but from all other use values generally, and is, by that very fact, expressed as that which is common to all commodi- ties. By this form, commodities are, for the first time, effectively brought into relation with one another as values, or made to appear as exchange values.

The two earlier forms either express the value of each commodity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or in a series of many such commodities. In both cases, it is, so to say, the special busi- ness of each single commodity to find an expression for its value, and



**[p. 77]**

this it does without the help of the others. These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts of equivalents. The general form of value, C, results from the joint action of the whole world of commo- dities, and from that alone. A commodity can acquire a general ex- pression of its value only by all other commodities, simultaneously with it, expressing their values in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow suit. It thus becomes evident that, since the existence of commodities as values is purely social, this social exist- ence can be expressed by the totality of their social relations alone, and consequently that the form of their value must be a socially rec- ognised form.

All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only as qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values whose mag- nitudes are capable of comparison. By expressing the magnitudes of their values in one and the same material,'the linen, those magnitudes are also compared with each other. For instance, 10 lbs of tea = 20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs of coffee = 20 yards of linen. Therefore, 10 lbs of tea = 40 lbs of coffee. In other words, there is contained in 1 lb. of coffee only one-fourth as much substance of value — labour—as is contained in 1 lb. of tea.

The general form of relative value, embracing the whole world of commodities, converts the single commodity that is excluded from the rest, and made to play the part of equivalent — here the linen — into the universal equivalent. The bodily form of the linen is now the form assumed in common by the values of all commodities; it there- fore becomes directly exchangeable with all and every of them. The substance linen becomes the visible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human labour. Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individuals producing a particular article, linen, ac- quires in consequence a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds of labour. The innumerable equations of which the general form of value is composed, equate in turn the labour em- bodied in the linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus convert weaving into the general form of manifestation of undifferentiated human labour. In this manner the labour realised in the values of commodities is presented not only under its negative as- pect, under which abstraction is made from every concrete form and useful property of actual work, but its own positive nature is made to reveal itself expressly. The general value form is the reduc- tion of all kinds of actual labour to their common character of being

