---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form "
Page_Range: "90-92"
---

# 2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and of the Equivalent Form 



**[p. 78]**

human labour generally, of being the expenditure of human labour power.

The general value form, which represents all products of labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated human labour, shows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the world of commodities. That form consequently makes it indisputably evident that in the world of commodities the character possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its specific social character.

2. The interdependent development of the Relative form of value, and of the Equivalent form

The degree of development of the relative form of value corre- sponds to that of the equivalent form. But we must bear in mind that the development of the latter is only the expression and result of the development of the former.

The primary or isolated relative form of value of one commodity converts some other commodity into an isolated equivalent. The ex- panded form of relative value, which is the expression of the value of one commodity in terms of all other commodities, endows those other commodities with the character of particular equivalents differing in kind. And lastly, a particular kind of commodity acquires the charac- ter of universal equivalent, because all other commodities make it the material in which they uniformly express their value.

The antagonism between the relative form of value and the equiv- alent form, the two poles of the value form, is developed concur- rently with that form itself.

The first form, 20 yds of linen = one coat, already contains this antagonism, without as yet fixing it. According as we read this equa- tion forwards or backwards, the parts played by the linen and the coat are different. In the one case the relative value of the linen is ex- pressed in the coat, in the other case the relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen. In this first form of value, therefore, it is diffi- cult to grasp the polar contrast.

Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can com- pletely expand its relative value, and that it acquires this expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other commodities are, with respect to it, equivalents. Here we cannot reverse the equation, as we can the equation 20 yds of linen = 1 coat, without altering its gene-



**[p. 79]**

ral character, and converting it from the expanded form of value into the general form of value.

Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a general so- cial relative form of value, because, and in so far as, thereby all com- modities, with the exception of one, are excluded from the equivalent form. A single commodity, the linen, appears therefore to have ac- quired the character of direct exchangeability with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this character is denied to every other commodity.11

The commodity that figures as universal equivalent, is, on the other hand, excluded from the relative value form. If the linen, or any other commodity serving as universal equivalent, were, at the same time, to share in the relative form of value, it would have to serve as its own equivalent. We should then have 20 yds of linen = 20 yds of linen; this tautology expresses neither value, nor magnitude of value. In order to express the relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse the form C. This equivalent has no relative form of value in common with other commodities, but its value is relatively expressed by a never ending series of other commodities. Thus, the expanded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the specific form of relative value for the equivalent commodity.

[^1]: " It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and universal exchange- ability is, so to speak, a polar one, and as intimately connected with its opposite pole, the absence of direct exchangeability, as the positive pole of the magnet is with its nega- tive counterpart. It may therefore be imagined that all commodities can simulta- neously have this character impressed upon them, just as it can be imagined that all Catholics can be popes together. It is, of course, highly desirable in the eyes of the pe- tit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the nee plus ultra " of human freedom and individual independence, that the inconveniences resulting from this char- acter of commodities not being directly exchangeable, should be removed. Proud- hon's socialism is a working out of this Philistine Utopia, a form of socialism which, as I have elsewhere shown,64 does not possess even the merit of originality. Long before his time, the task was attempted with much better success by Gray, Bray, and others. But, for all that, wisdom of this kind flourishes even now in certain circles under the name of "science". Never has any school played more tricks with the word science, than that of Proudhon, for

[^2]: "wo Begriffe fehlen, Da stellt zur rechten Zeit ein Wort sich ein".65

[^3]: a summit



