---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "D. The Money Form "
Page_Range: "92-93"
---

# D. The Money Form 



**[p. 80]**

3. Transition from the General form of value to the Money form

The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. It can, therefore, be assumed by any commodity. On the other hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the universal equivalent form (form C), this is only because and in so far as it has been excluded from the rest of all other commodities as their equivalent, and that by their own act. And from the moment that this exclusion becomes finally restricted to one particular commodity, from that moment only, the general form of relative value of the world of commodities obtains real consistence and general social validity.

The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equivalent form is thus socially identified, now becomes the money commodity, or serves as money. It becomes the special social function ofthat com- modity, and consequently its social monopoly, to play within the world of commodities the part of the universal equivalent. Amongst the commodities which, in form B, figure as particular equivalents of the linen, and, in form C, express in common their relative values in linen, this foremost place has been attained by one in particu- lar— namely, gold. If, then, in form C we replace the linen by gold, we get,

D. The Money form

20 yards of linen =

1 coat = 10 lbs of tea = 40 lbs .of coffee = > 2 ounces of gold 1 qr. of corn = •y a ton of iron = x commodity A =

In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to form C, the changes are fundamental. On the other hand, there is no dif- ference between forms C and D, except that, in the latter, gold has as- sumed the equivalent form in the place of linen. Gold is in form D, what linen was in form C — the universal equivalent. The progress consists in this alone, that the character of direct and universal exchangeability — in other words, that the universal equivalent

