---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "b. The Currency of Money "
Page_Range: "136-147"
---

# b. The Currency of Money 



**[p. 124]**

b. The currency"1' of money

The change of form, C—M—C, by which the circulation of the material products of labour is brought about, requires that a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the process, and shall, also in the shape of a commodity, end it. The movement of the com- modity is therefore a circuit. On the other hand, the form of this move- ment precludes a circuit from being made by the money. The result is not the return of the money, but its continued removal further and further away from its starting-point. So long as the seller sticks fast to his money, which is the transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity is still in the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed only half its course. But so soon as he completes the proc- ess, so soon as he supplements his sale by a purchase, the money

[^1]: 11 See my observations on James Mill in Zur Kritik, &c, pp. 74-76 [present edition, Vol. 29, pp. 332-34]. With regard to this subject, we may notice two methods charac- teristic of apologetic economy. The first is the identification of the circulation of com- modities with the direct barter of products, by simple abstraction from their points of difference; the second is, the attempt to explain away the contradictions of capitalist production, by reducing the relations between the persons engaged in that mode of production, to the simple relations arising out of the circulation of commodities. The production and circulation of commodities are, however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in modes of production the most diverse. If we are acquainted with nothing but the abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these modes of production, we cannot possibly know anything of the specific points of differ- ence of those modes, nor pronounce any judgment upon them. In no science is Such a big fuss made with commonplace truisms as in political economy. For instance, J. B. Say sets himself up as a judge of crises, because, forsooth, he knows that a com- modity is a product.110

[^2]: 2! Translator's note.— This word is here used in its original signification of the course or track pursued by money as it changes from hand to hand, a course which essentially differs from circulation.

[^3]: a In the German editions there follows one more paragraph here: "As medium in the circulation of commodities money acquires the function of the means of circulation."





**[p. 125]**

again leaves the hands of its possessor. It is true that if the weaver, af- ter buying the Bible, sell more linen, money comes back into his hands. But this return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; that circulation resulted in the money getting into the hands of the seller of the Bible. The return of money into the hands of the weaver is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process of circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends with the same result as its predecessor did. Hence the movement directly imparted to money by the circulation of commodities takes the form of a constant motion away from its starting-point, of a course from the hands of one commodity owner into those of another. This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie).

The currency of money is the constant and monotonous repetition of the same process. The commodity is always in the hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase; always in the hands of the buyer. And money serves as a means of purchase by realising the price of the commodity. This realisation transfers the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money from the hands of the buyer into those of the seller, where it again goes through the same process with another commodity. That this one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the two-sided character of the commodity's motion, is a circumstance that is veiled over. The very nature of the circulation of commodities begets the opposite appear- ance. The first metamorphosis of a commodity is visibly, not only the money's movement, but also that of the commodity itself; in the sec- ond metamorphosis, on the contrary, the movement appears to us as the movement of the money alone. In the first phase of its circulation the commodity changes place with the money. Thereupon the com- modity, under its aspect of a useful object, falls out of circulation into consumption.11 In its stead we have its value shape — the money. It then goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its own natural shape, but under the shape of money. The continuity of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and the same movement that as regards the commodity consists of two processes of an antithetical character, is, when considered as the movement of the money, always one and the same process, a continued change of places

[^1]: " Even when the commodity is sold over and over again, a phenomenon that at present has no existence for us, it falls, when definitely sold for the last time, out of the sphere of circulation into that of consumption, where it serves either as means of sub- sistence or means of production.





**[p. 126]**

with ever fresh commodities. Hence the result brought about by the circulation of commodities, namely, the replacing of one com- modity by another, takes the appearance of having been effected not by means of the change of form of the commodities, but rather by the money acting as a medium of circulation, by an action that circulates commodities, to all appearance motionless in themselves, and trans- fers them from hands in which they are non-use values, to hands in which they are use values; and that in a direction constantly opposed to the direction of the money. The latter is continually withdrawing commodities from circulation and stepping into their places, and in this way continually moving further and further from its starting- point. Hence although the movement of the money is merely the ex- pression of the circulation of commodities, yet the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money.1'

Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because in it the values of commodities have independent reality. Hence its move- ment, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely the movement of commodities while changing their forms. This fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the currency of money. Thus a the linen, for instance, first of all changes its commodity-form into its money form. The second term of its first metamorphosis, C—M, the money form, then becomes the first term of its final metamorphosis, M—C, its re-conversion into the Bible. But each of these two changes of form is accomplished by an exchange between commodity and money, by their reciprocal displacement. The same pieces of coin come into the seller's hand as the alienated form of the commodity and leave it as the ab- solutely alienable form of the commodity. They are displaced twice. The first metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it. The two inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected in the displacement, twice repeated, but in opposite directions, of the same pieces of coin.

If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is gone through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a given piece of money changes its place only once. Its second change of place al-

[^1]: 11 "It" (money) "has no other motion than that imparted to it by the products" (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 885).

[^2]: a Here (from "Thus the linen" to "commodities in general", p. 127) the English text has been altered in conformity with the 4th German edition.





**[p. 127]**

ways expresses the second metamorphosis of the commodity, its re- conversion from money. The frequent repetition of the displacement of the same coins reflects not only the series of metamorphoses that a single commodity has gone through, but also the intertwining of the innumerable metamorphoses in the world of commodities in general. It is a matter of course, that all this is applicable to the simple circula- tion of commodities alone, the only form that we are now consider- ing Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and undergoes its first change of form, does so only to fall out of circulation again and to be replaced by other commodities. Money, on the contrary, as the medium of circulation, keeps continually within the sphere of cir- culation, and moves about in it. The question therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs?

In a given country there take place every day at the same time, but in different localities, numerous one-sided metamorphoses of com- modities, or, in other words, numerous sales and numerous purchases. The commodities are equated beforehand in imagination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money. And since, in the form of circu- lation now under consideration, money and commodities always come bodily face to face, one at the positive pole of purchase, the other at the negative pole of sale, it is clear that the amount of the means of circulation required, is determined beforehand by the sum of the prices of all these commodities. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed be- forehand by the sum of the prices of the commodities. The equality of these two sums is therefore self-evident. We know, however, that, the values of commodities remaining constant, their prices vary with the value of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, and falling in proportion as it rises. Now if, in consequence of such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the prices of commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must fall or rise to the same extent. The change in the quantity of the circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money itself, yet not in virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, but of its function as a meas- ure of value. First, the price of the commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then the quantity of the medium of circula- tion varies directly as the price of the commodities. Exactly the same thing would happen if, for instance, instead of the value of gold fal- ling, gold were replaced by silver as the measure of value, or if, in-



**[p. 128]**

stead of the value of silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being the measure of value. In the one case, more silver would be cur- rent than gold was before, in the other case, less gold would be cur- rent than silver was before. In each case the value of the material of money, i. e., the value of the commodity that serves as the measure of value, would have undergone a change, and therefore so, too, would the prices of commodities which express their values in money, and so, too, would the quantity of money current whose function it is to realise those prices. We have already seen, that the sphere of circula- tion has an opening through which gold (or the material of money generally) enters into it as a commodity with a given value. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a measure of value, when it ex- presses prices, its value is already determined. If now its value fall, this fact is first evidenced by a change in the prices of those commodi- ties that are directly bartered for the precious metals at the sources of their production. The greater part of all other commodities, espe- cially in the imperfectly developed stages of civil society, will continue for a long time to be estimated by the former antiquated and illusory value of the measure of value. Nevertheless, one commodity infects another through their common value relation, so that their prices, ex- pressed in gold or in silver, gradually settle down into the proportions determined by their comparative values, until finally the values of all commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the metal that constitutes money. This process is accompanied by the continued in- crease in the quantity of the precious metals, an increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles directly bartered for them at their sources of production. In proportion therefore as commodities in general acquire their true prices, in proportion as their values be- come estimated according to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the same proportion the quantity ofthat metal necessary for realising those new prices is provided beforehand. A one-sided observation of the results that followed upon the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and silver, led some economists in the 17th, and particularly in the 18th century, to the false conclusion, that the prices of commodities had gone up in consequence of the increased quantity of gold and sil- ver serving as means of circulation. Henceforth we shall consider the value of gold to be given, as, in fact, it is momentarily whenever we estimate the price of a commodity.

On this supposition then, the quantity of the medium of circulation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be realised. If now



**[p. 129]**

we further suppose the price of each commodity to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends on the mass of commodities in circula- tion. It requires but little racking of brains to comprehend that if one quarter of wheat costs £2, 100 quarters will cost £200, 200 quarters £400, and so on, that consequently the quantity of money that changes place with the wheat, when sold, must increase with the quantity of that wheat.

If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of circu- lating money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of those com- modities. It increases and diminishes because the sum of the prices in- creases or diminishes in consequence of the change of price. To pro- duce this effect, it is by no means requisite that the prices of all com- modities should rise or fall simultaneously. A rise or a fall in the prices of a number of leading articles, is sufficient in the one case to increase, in the other to diminish, the sum of the prices of all commodities, and, therefore, to put more or less money in circulation. Whether the change in the price correspond to an actual change of value in the commodities, or whether it be the result of mere fluctuations in mar- kert prices, the effect on the quantity of the medium of circulation re- mains the same.

Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially metamor- phosed simultaneously in different localities: say, one quarter of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of brandy. If the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the prices to be realised be consequently £8, it follows that £8 in money must go into circulation. If, on the other hand, these same articles are links in the following chain of met- amorphoses: 1 quarter of wheat — £2 — 20 yards of linen — £2—1 Bible — £2 — 4 gallons of brandy — £2, a chain that is already well known to us, in that case the £2 cause the different commodities to circulate one after the other, and after realising their prices succes- sively, and therefore the sum of those prices, £8, they come to rest at last in the pocket of the distiller. The £2 thus make four moves. This repeated change of place of the same pieces of money corresponds to the double change in form of the commodities, to their motion in op- posite directions through two stages of circulation, and to the inter- lacing of the metamorphoses of different commodities.'> These anti-

[^1]: 1! "It is products which set it" (money) "in motion and make it circulate The ve- locity of its" (money's) "motion supplements its quantity. When necessary, it does nothing but slide from hand to hand, without stopping for a moment" (Le Trosne,

[^2]: 1. c, pp. 915, 916).





**[p. 130]**

thetic and complementary phases, of which the process of metamor- phosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but succes- sively. Time is therefore required for the completion of the series. Hence the velocity of the currency of money is measured by the num- ber of moves made by a given piece of money in a given time. Sup- pose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. The sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8, the number of moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of money circulating is £2. Hence, for a given interval of time during the process of circulation, we have the following relation: the quantity of money functioning as the circu- lating medium is equal to the sum of the prices of the commodities di- vided by the number of moves made by coins of the same denomina- tion. This law holds generally.

The total circulation of commodities in a given country during a given period is made up on the one hand of numerous isolated and si- multaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which are at the same time purchases, in which each coin changes its place only once, or makes only one move; on the other hand, of numerous distinct series of met- amorphoses partly running side by side, and partly coalescing with each other, in each of which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number being greater or less according to circumstances. The total number of moves made by all the circulating coins of one de- nomination being given, we can arrive at the average number of moves made by a single coin ofthat denomination, or at the average velocity of the currency of money. The quantity of money thrown into the cir- culation at the beginning of each day is of course determined by the sum of the prices of all the commodities circulating simultaneously side by side. But once in circulation, coins are, so to say, made respon- sible for one another. If the one increase its velocity, the other either retards its own, or altogether falls out of circulation; for the circula- tion can absorb only such a quantity of gold as, when multiplied by the mean number of moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised. Hence if the number of moves made by the separate pieces increase, the total number of those pieces in circulation diminishes. If the number of the moves diminish, the total number of pieces increases. Since the quantity of money ca- pable of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given mean velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a given number of sovereigns from the circulation is to throw the same num- ber of one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to all bankers.



**[p. 131]**

Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or of the antithetical meta- morphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity ofthat currency reflects the rapidity with which commodities change their forms, the con- tinued interlacing of one series of metamorphoses with another, the hurried social interchange of matter, the rapid disappearance of com- modities from the sphere of circulation, and the equally rapid substi- tution of fresh ones in their places. Hence, in the velocity of the cur- rency we have the fluent unity of the antithetical and complementary phases, the unity of the conversion of the useful aspect of commodities into their value aspect, and their re-conversion from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity of the two processes of sale and purchase. On the other hand, the retardation of the currency reflects the sepa- ration of these two processes into isolated antithetical phases, reflects the stagnation in the change of form, and therefore, in the social interchange of matter. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the origin of this stagnation; it merely puts in evidence the phenom- enon itself. The general public, who, simultaneously with the retar- dation of the currency, see money appear and disappear less fre- quently at the periphery of circulation, naturally attribute this retar- dation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium."

[^1]: '• "Money being the common measure of buying and selling, everybody who hath anything to sell, and cannot procure chapmen for it, is presently apt to think, that want of money in the kingdom, or country, is the cause why his goods do not go off; and so, want of money is the common cry; which is a great mistake What do these people want, who cry out for money? The farmer complains he thinks that were more money in the country, he should have a price for his goods. Then it seems money is not his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which he would sell, but cannot Why cannot he get a price? (1) Either there is too much corn and cattel in the coun- try, so that most who come to market have need of selling, as he hath, and few of buy- ing; or (2) There wants the usual vent abroad by transportation; or (3) The con- sumption fails, as when men, by reason of poverty, do not spend so much in their houses as formerly they did; wherefore it is not the increase of specific money, which would at all advance the farmer's goods, but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down the market The merchant and shopkeeper want money in the same manner, that is, they want a vent for the goods they deal in, by reason that the markets fail" [A nation] "never thrives better, than when riches are tost from hand to hand" (Sir Dudley North, Discourses upon Trade, London, 1691, pp. 11-15, pas- sim). Herrenschwand's fanciful notions amount merely to this, that the antagonism, which has its origin in the nature of commodities, and is reproduced in their circula- tion, can be removed by increasing the circulating medium. ' ' ' But if, on the one hand, it is a popular delusion to ascribe stagnation in production and circulation to insuffi- ciency of the circulating medium, it by no means follows, on the other hand, that an





**[p. 132]**

The total quantity of money functioning during a given period as the circulating medium, is determined, on the one hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, and on the other hand, by the rapidity with which the antithetical phases of the meta- morphoses follow one another. On this rapidity depends what pro- portion of the sum of the prices can, on the average, be realised by each single coin. But the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, as well as on the prices, of the commodities. These three factors, however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, and velocity of money currency, are all variable. Hence, the sum of the prices to be realised, and consequently the quantity of the circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the numerous variations of these three factors in combination. Of these variations we'shall consider those alone that have been the most important in the history of prices.

While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulating me- dium may increase owing to the number of circulating commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreasing, or to a combina- tion of the two. On the other hand the quantity of the circulating me- dium may decrease with a decreasing number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their circulation.

With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally to the increase in their prices, or provided the velocity of currency increase at the same rate as prices rise, the number of commodities in circulation remain- ing constant. The quantity of the circulating medium may decrease, owing to the number of commodities decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency increasing more rapidly, than prices rise.

With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quantity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall in price, or provided the velocity of currency decrease in the same proportion. The quan- tity of the circulating medium will increase, provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the rapidity of circulation decrease quicker, than the prices fall.

The variations of the different factors may mutually compensate

[^1]: actual paucity of the medium in consequence, e. g., of bungling legislative interference with the regulation of currency, may not give rise to such stagnation.





**[p. 133]**

each other, so that notwithstanding their continued instability, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity of money in circula- tion remain constant; consequently, we find, especially if we take long periods into consideration, that the deviations from the average level, of the quantity of money current in any country, are much smaller than we should at first sight expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations periodically arising from industrial and commercial crises, or, less frequently, from fluctuations in the value of money. The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is determined by the sum of the prices of the commodities circulating, and the aver- age velocity of currency '' may also be stated as follows: given the sum of the values of commodities, and the average rapidity of their meta- morphoses, the quantity of precious metal current as money depends on the value of that precious metal. The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices that are determined by the quantity of the cir- culating medium, and that the latter depends on the quantity of the

" "There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to drive the trade of a nation, more or less than which would prejudice the same. Just as there is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a small retail trade, to change silver money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be adjusted with the smallest silver pieces Now, as the proportion of the number of farthings requisite in commerce is to be taken from the number of people, the frequency of their exchanges: as also, and principally, from the value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so in like manner, the proportion of money" (gold and silver species) "requisite to our trade, is to be likewise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the bigness of the payments" (William Petty, A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions, London, 1667, [p]p. 17 [, 18]). The Theory of Hume ' 1 2 was defended against the attacks of J. Steuart and others, by A. Young, in his Political Arithmetic, London, 1774, in which work there is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on quantity of money", at p. 112, sqq. I have stated in ^ur Kritik, &c, p. 149 [present edition, Vol. 29, p. 399]: "He" (Adam Smith) "passes over without remark the question as to the quantity of coin in circulation, and treats money quite wrongly as a mere commodity." This statement applies only in so far as Adam Smith, ex officio, treats of money. Now and then, however, as in his criticism of the earlier sys- tems of political economy, he takes the right view. "The quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be circulated by it The value of the goods annually bought and sold in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment to no more. The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any more" {Wealth of Nations, Bk. IV, ch. I). In like manner, ex officio, he opens his work with an apotheosis on the division of labour. Afterwards, in the last book which treats of the sources of public revenue [I.e., Bk. V, ch. II], he occasionally repeats the denunciations of the division of labour made by his teacher, A. Ferguson.



**[p. 134]**

1 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold and silver in- crease amongst the people; and consequently, where the gold and silver decrease in any nation, the prices of all things must fall proportionately to such decrease of money" (Jacob Vanderlint, Money Answers All Things, London, 1734, p. 5). A careful compar- ison of this book with Hume's Essays, proves to my mind without doubt that Hume was acquainted with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is certainly an important one. The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, was also held by Barbon113 and other much earlier writers. "No inconvenience," says Vanderlint, "can arise by an unrestrained trade, but very great advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the cash will certainly find everything advance in price, as the cash increases amongst them. And our manufactures, and everything else, will soon become so moderate as to turn the balance of trade in our favour, and thereby fetch the money back again" (1. c , pp. 43, 44).

2 That the price of each single kind of commodity forms a part of the sum of the prices of all the commodities in circulation, is a self-evident proposition. But how use values, which are incommensurable with regard to each other, are to be exchanged, en masse, for the total sum of gold and silver in a country, is quite incomprehensible. If we start from the notion that all commodities together form one single commodity, of which each is but an aliquot part, we get the following beautiful result: The total com- modity = x cwt. of gold; commodity A = an aliquot part of the total commodity = the same aliquot part of x cwt. of gold. This is stated in all seriousness by Montesquieu: "If one compares the amount of gold and silver in the world with the sum of the commodi- ties available, it is certain that each product or commodity, taken in isolation, could be compared with a certain portion of the total amount of money. Let us suppose that there is only one product, or commodity, in the world, or only one that can be pur- chased, and that it can be divided in the same way as money: a certain part of this com- modity would then correspond to a part of the total amount of money; half the total of the one would correspond to half the total of the other, &. the determination of the prices of things always depends, fundamentally, on the relation between the total amount of things and the total amount of their monetary symbols" (Montesquieu, 1. c, t. I'll, pp. 12, 13). As to the further development of this theory by Ricardo and his disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and others, see ^ur Kritik, &c, pp. 140-46, and p. 150,

[^1]: sqq. [present edition, Vol. 29, pp. 390-96 and p. 399 sqq.]. John Stuart Mill, with his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view of his father, James Mill, and the opposite view. On a comparison of the text of his compendium, Prin- ciples of Pol.Econ., with his preface to the first edition, in which preface he announces himself as the Adam Smith of his day — we do not know whether to admire more the simplicity of the man, or that of the public, who took him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith he announced himself to be, although he bears about as much resemblance to



