---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "a. Hoarding "
Page_Range: "152-157"
---

# a. Hoarding 



**[p. 140]**

which is co-terminous with the territories of the community, but it is also only within that sphere that money completely responds to its function of being the circulating medium, or becomes coin.a

SECTION 3.—MONEY

The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, either in its own person or by a representative, as the medium of circulation, is money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. It functions as money, on the one hand, when it has to be present in its own golden person. It is then the money commodity, neither merely ideal, as in its func- tion of a measure of value, nor capable of being represented, as in its function of circulating medium. On the other hand, it also functions as money, when by virtue of its function, whether that function be performed in person or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value, the only adequate form of existence of exchange value, in opposition to use value, represented by all other commodities.

a. Hoarding The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical meta- morphoses of commodities, or the never ceasing alternation of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, or in the function that money performs of a perpetuum mobile of circulation. But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is interrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by subsequent purchases, money ceases to be mobilised; it is transformed, as Boisguillebert says, from "meuble" into "immeuble", ' '7 from movable into immovable, from coin into money.

With the very earliest development of the circulation of commodi- ties, there is also developed the necessity, and the passionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. This product is the transformed shape of the commodity, or its gold-chrysalis." Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity form by their money form. From being the mere means of effecting the circulation of commodities, this

[^1]: 1 "Monetary wealth is nothing but wealth in products, transformed into money" (Mercier de la Rivière, 1. c. [p. 573]). "A value in the form of product, which has merely changed its form" (ibid., p. 486).

[^2]: a In the German editions the sentence ends as follows: ", and is therefore able to re- ceive, in the form of paper money, a purely functional mode of existence in which it is externally separated from its metallic substance."





**[p. 141]**

change of form becomes the end and aim. The changed form of the commodity is thus prevented from functioning as its unconditionally alienable form, or as its merely transient money form. The money be- comes petrified into a hoard, and the seller becomes a hoarder of money.

In the early stages of the circulation of commodities, it is the sur- plus use values alone that are converted into money. Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions for superfluity or wealth. This naïve form of hoarding becomes perpetuated in those communi- ties in which the traditional mode of production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited circle of home wants. It is thus with the people of Asia, and particularly of the East Indies. Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices of commodities in a country are determined by the quantity of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself why In- dian commodities are so cheap. ' ' 8 Answer: Because the Hindus bury their money. From 1602 to 1734, he remarks, they buried 150 mil- lions of pounds sterling of silver, which originally came from America to Europe.1' In the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported to India and China £120,000,000 in silver, which had been received in exchange for Australian gold. Most of the silver exported to China makes its way to India.

As the production of commodities further develops, every pro- ducer of commodities is compelled to make sure of the nexus rerum ' ' 9

or the social pledge.2' His wants are constantly making themselves felt, and necessitate the continual purchase of other people's commod- ities, while the production and sale of his own goods require time, and depend upon circumstances. In order then to be able to buy without selling, he must have sold previously without buying. This operation, conducted on a general scale, appears to imply a contra- diction. But the precious metals at the sources of their production are directly exchanged for other commodities. And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without purchases (by the owners of gold or silver).3' And subsequent sales, by other producers, unfol- lowed by purchases, merely bring about the distribution of the newly

[^1]: 11 " 'Tis by this practice they keep all their goods and manufactures at such low rates" (Vanderlint, 1. c, [p]p. [95,] 96).

[^2]: 2: "Money is a pledge" (John Bellers, Essays about the Poor, Manufacturers, Trade, Plantations, and Immorality, London, 1699, p. 13).

[^3]: 3 A purchase, in a "categorical" sense, implies that gold and silver are already the converted form of commodities, or the product of a sale.





**[p. 142]**

"Gold is a wonderful thing! Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means of gold one can even get souls into Paradise." (Columbus in his letter from Jamaica, 1503).

Since gold does not disclose what has been transformed into it, everything, commodity or not, is convertible into gold. Everything becomes saleable and buyable. The circulation becomes the great so- cial retort into which everything is thrown, to come out again as a gold crystal. Not even are the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosanctœ, extra commercium hominuma able to withstand this alchemy.'Just as every qualitative difference between commodities is extinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical level- ler85 that it is, does away with all distinctions.21 But money itself is

[^1]: " Henry III, most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their relics, and turned them into money.120 It is well known what part the despoiling of the Delphic Temple, by the Phocians, played in the history of Greece.121 Temples with the an- cients served as the dwellings of the gods of commodities. They were "sacred banks". With the Phoenicians, a trading people par excellence, money was the transmuted shape of everything. It was, therefore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of the Goddess of Love, gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the piece of money they received.

[^2]: 2 "Gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold!

[^3]: Thus much of this, will make black white; foul, fair; Wrong, right; base, noble; old, young; coward, valiant. What this, you gods? Why, this Will lug your priests and servants from your sides; Pluck stout men's pillows from below their heads; This yellow slave Will knit and break religions; bless the accurs'd; Make the hoar leprosy ador'd; place thieves, And give them title, knee and approbation, With senators on the bench; this is it, That makes the wappen'd widow wed again: Come damned earth, Though common whore of mankind."

[^4]: (Shakespeare, Timon of Athens [Act IV, Scene 3]).

[^5]: consecrated objects, beyond human commerce





**[p. 143]**

a commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the private property of any individual. Thus social power becomes the private power of private persons. The ancients therefore denounced money as subversive of the economic and moral order of things." Modern so- ciety, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus by the hair of his head from the bowels of the earth,2' greets gold as its Holy Grail,122 as the glittering incarnation of the very principle of its own life.

A commodity, in its capacity of a use value, satisfies a particular want, and is a particular element of material wealth. But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction for all other elements of material wealth, and therefore measures the social wealth of its owner. To a barbarian owner of commodities, and even to a West European peasant, value is the same as value form, and there- fore, to him the increase in his hoard of gold and silver is an increase in value. It is true that the value of money varies, at one time in con- sequence of a variation in its own value, at another, in consequence of a change in the values of commodities. But this, on the one hand, does not prevent 200 ounces of gold from still containing more value than 100 ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual metallic form of this article from continuing to be the universal equivalent form of all other commodities, and the immediate social incarnation of all human labour. The desire after hoarding is in its very nature unsatiable. In its qualitative aspect, or formally considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i. e., it is the universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly convertible into any other com- modity. But, at the same time, every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, as a means of purchasing, has only a limited

[^1]: 1 "Money! Nothing worse in our lives, so current, rampant, so corrupting. Money — you demolish cities, root men from their homes, you train and twist good minds and set them on to the most atrocious schemes. No limit, you make them adept at every kind of outrage, every godless crime — money!"

[^2]: (Sophocles, Antigone [lines 295-301]). a

[^3]: 21 "Avarice hopes to drag Pluto himself out of the bowels of the earth" (Athenaeus, Deipnos[ophistae], 1. VI, 23, Vol. 2, ed. Schweighäuser, p. 397).

[^4]: a Marx quotes in Greek. English translation by Robert Fagles (Sophocles, The Three Theban Plays, London, 1982, p. 73).





**[p. 144]**

In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from transforming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On the other hand, he can withdraw from cir- culation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of commodities. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. Hard work, saving, and avarice, are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy.1'

By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its aesthetic form in the possession of gold and silver articles. This grows with the wealth of civil society. "Soyons riches ou paraissons riches" (Diderot).123 In this way there is created, on the one hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver, unconnected with their functions as money, and, on the other hand, a latent source of supply, to which recourse is had principally in times of crisis and social disturbance.

Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the metallic circulation. Its first function arises out of the conditions to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. We have seen how, along with the continual fluctuations in the extent and rapidity of the circu- lation of commodities and in their prices, the quantity of money cur- rent unceasingly ebbs and flows. This mass must, therefore, be capa- ble of expansion and contraction. At one time money must be at- tracted in order to act as circulating coin, at another, circulating coin must be repelled in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. In order that the mass of money, actually current, may constantly sat- urate the absorbing power of the circulation, it is necessary that the quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater than the quantity required to function as coin. This condition is fulfilled by money tak-

[^1]: '> "These are the pivots around which all the measures of political economy turn: the maximum possible increase in the number of sellers of each commodity, and the maximum possible decrease in the number of buyers" (Verri, I.e., [p]p. 52[-53]).



