---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "b. Means of Payment "
Page_Range: "157-165"
---

# b. Means of Payment 



**[p. 145]**

ing the form of hoards. These reserves serve as conduits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circulation, which in this way never overflows its banks.1'

b. Means of Payment

In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto consid- ered, we found a given value always presented to us in a double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the opposite pole. The owners of commodities came therefore into contact as the respec- tive representatives of what were already equivalents. But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under which the aliena- tion of commodities becomes separated, by an interval of time, from the realisation of their prices. It will be sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions. One sort of article requires a longer, anoth- er a shorter time for its production. Again, the production of different commodities depends on different seasons of the year. One sort of commodity may be born on its own market place, another has to make a long journey to market. Commodity owner No. 1, may there- fore be ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to buy. When the same transactions are continually repeated between the same persons, the conditions of sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions of production. On the other hand, the use of a given commodity, of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a definite period. Here, it is only at the end of the term that the buyer has ac- tually received the use value of the commodity. He therefore buys it

[^1]: " "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determinate sum of specifick money, which varies, and is sometimes more, sometimes less, as the circum- stances we are in require This ebbing and flowing of money supplies and accommo- dates itself, without any aid of Politicians The buckets work alternately; when money is scarce, bullion is coined; when bullion is scarce, money is melted" (Sir D. North, 1. c, Postscript, p. III). John Stuart Mill, who for a long time was an offi- cial of the East India Company.12* confirms the fact that in India silver ornaments still continue to perform directly the functions of a hoard. The "silver ornaments are brought out and coined when there is a high rate of interest, and go back again when the rate of interest falls" (J. S. Mill's Evidence. "Reports on Bank Acts", 1857, 2084 [,2101]). According to a Parliamentary document of 1864, on the gold and silver im- port and export of India,125 the import of gold and silver in 1863 exceeded the export by £19,367,764. During the 8 years immediately preceding 1864, the excess of imports over exports of the precious metals amounted to £109,652,917. During this century far more than £200,000,000 has been coined in India.





**[p. 146]**

The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the simple circulation. The change in the form of that circulation stamps buyer and seller with this new die. At first, therefore, these new parts are just as transient and alternating as those of seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. But the opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more capable of crystallisation.1' The same char- acters can, however, be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. The class struggles of the ancient world took the form chiefly of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome end- ed in the ruin of the plebeian debtors. They were displaced by slaves. In the Middle Ages the contest ended with the ruin of the feudal debtors, who lost their political power together with the economic basis on which it was established. Nevertheless, the money relation of debt- or and creditor that existed at these two periods reflected only the deeper-lying antagonism between the general economic conditions of existence of the classes in question.

Let us return to the circulation of commodities. The appearance of the two equivalents, commodities and money, at the two poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. The money functions now, first as a measure of value in the determination of the price of the commodity sold; the price fixed by the contract measures the obli- gation of the debtor, or the sum of money that he has to pay at a fixed date. Secondly, it serves as an ideal means of purchase. Although existing only in the promise of the buyer to pay, it causes the commod-

[^1]: 1 The following shows the debtor and creditor relations existing between English traders at the beginning of the 18th century. "Such a spirit of cruelty reigns here in Eng- land among the men of trade, that is not to be met with in any other society of men, nor in any other kingdom of the world" (An Essay on Credit and the Bankrupt Act, London, 1707, p. 2).

[^2]: a In the German editions there is the following footnote here: "Luther distinguishes be- tween money as means of purchase and means of payment: 'You have caused me to suf- fer twofold damage, because I cannot pay on the one hand and cannot buy on the oth- er' (Martin Luther, An die Pfarrherrn, wider den Wucher zu predigen, Wittemberg, 1540)."





**[p. 147]**

ity to change hands. It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means of payment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer for that of the seller. The circulating medium was trans- formed into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first phase, because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the money, was withdrawn from circulation. The means of payment en- ters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left it. The money is no longer the means that brings about the process. It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of existence of exchange value, or as the universal commodity. The seller turned his commodity into money, in order thereby to satisfy some want; the hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity in its money shape, and the debtor in order to be able to pay; if he do not pay, his goods will be sold by the sheriff. The value form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim of a sale, and that owing to a social necessity springing out of the process of circulation itself.

The buyer converts money back into commodities before he has turned commodities into money: in other words, he achieves the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. The seller's commodity circulates, and realises its price, but only in the shape of a legal claim upon money. It is converted into a use value before it has been converted into money. The completion of its first meta- morphosis follows only at a later period.1'

The obligations falling due within a given period, represent the sum of the prices of the commodities, the sale of which gave rise to those obligations. The quantity of gold a necessary to realise this sum, depends, in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency of the means

[^1]: 11 It will be seen from the following quotation from my book which appeared in 1859, why I take no notice in the text of an opposite form. "Contrariwise, in the process M — C, the money can be alienated as a real means of purchase, and in that way, the price of the commodity can be realised before the use value of the money is realised and the commodity actually delivered. This occurs constantly under the everyday form of pre-payments. And it is under this form, that the English government purchases opium from the ryots of India In these cases, however, the money always acts as a means of purchase Of course capital also is advanced in the shape of money This point of view, however, does not fall within the horizon of simple circulation" [Zur Kritik, &c, pp. 119, 120 [present edition, Vol. 29, pp. 372-73]).

[^2]: a The German editions have "money".





**[p. 148]**

The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, and side by side, limits the extent to which coin can be replaced by the rapidity of currency. On the other hand, this fact is a new lever in economising the means of payment. In proportion as payments are concentrated at one spot, special institutions and methods are developed for their liquidation. Such in the Middle Ages were the virements* at Lyons. The debts due to A from B, to B from C, to C from A, and so on, have only to be confronted with each other, in order to annul each other to a certain extent like positive and negative quantities. There thus re- mains only a single balance to pay. The greater the amount of the pay- ments concentrated, the less is this balance relatively to that amount, and the less is the mass of the means of payment in circulation.

The function of money as the means of payment implies a contra- diction without a terminus médius. In so far as the payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as money of account, as a measure of value. In so far as actual payments have to be made, money does not serve as a circulating medium, as a mere transient agent in the interchange of products, but as the individual incarna- tion of social labour, as the independent form of existence of exchange value, as the universal commodity. This contradiction comes to a head in those phases of industrial and commercial crises which are known as monetary crises.1 Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-

[^1]: ' The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every crisis, must be clearly distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which also is called a monetary crisis, but which may be produced by itself as an independent phenomenon in such

[^2]: a clearing-houses





**[p. 149]**

If we now consider the sum total of the money current during a giv- en period, we shall find that, given the rapidity of currency of the cir- culating medium and of the means of payment, it is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised, plus the sum of the payments falling

[^1]: a way as to react only indirectly on industry and commerce. The pivot of these crises is to be found in moneyed capital, and their sphere of direct action is therefore the sphere of that capital, viz., banking, the stock exchange, and finance.

[^2]: 11 "The sudden reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard cash heaps theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers by whose agency circu- lation is affected, shudder before the impenetrable mystery in which their own eco- nomic relations are involved" (Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 126 [present edition, Vol. 29, pp. 378-79]). "The poor stand still, because the rich have no money to employ them, though they have the same land and hands to provide victuals and clothes, as ever they had; which is the true Riches of a Nation, and not the money" (John Bellers, Propo- sals for Raising a College of Industry, London. 1696, [p]p. 3 [-4].

[^3]: 21 The following shows how such times are exploited by the "amis du commerce". "On one occasion" (1839) "an old grasping banker" (in the City) "in his private room raised the lid of the desk he sat over, and displayed to a friend rolls of banknotes, saying with intense glee there were £ 600,000 of them, they were held to make money tight, and would all be let out after three o'clock on the same day" ([H. Roy,] The Theory of the Exchanges. The Bank Charter Act of 1844, London, 1864, p. 81). The Observer, a semi- official government organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 1864: "Some very curious rumours are current of the means which have been resorted to in order to create a scarcity of banknotes Questionable as it would seem, to suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has been so universal that it re- ally deserves mention" [1. c , p. 236].





**[p. 150]**

Credit money springs directly out of the function of money as a means of payment. Certificates of the debts owing for the purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring those debts to others. On the other hand, to the same extent as the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money as a means of payment. In that character it takes various forms peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at home in the sphere of great commercial transactions. Gold and silver coin, on the other hand, are mostly relegated to the sphere of retail trade.2'

When the production of commodities has sufficiently extended it- self, money begins to serve as the means of payment beyond the

[^1]: 1 "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course of any given day, will not affect the quantity of money afloat on that particular day, but, in the vast majority of cases, will resolve themselves into multifarious drafts upon the quantity of money which may be afloat at subsequent dates more or less distant The bills granted or credits opened, today, need have no resemblance whatever, either in quantity, amount, or duration, to those granted or entered upon to-morrow or next day; nay, many of today's bills, and credits, when due, fall in with a mass of liabilities whose origins traverse a range of antecedent dates altogether indefinite, bills at 12, 6, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to swell the common liabilities of one particu- lar day" (The Currency Theory Reviewed; [in] a Letter to the Scottish People. By a Banker in England. Edinburgh, 1845, pp. 29, 30, passim.)

[^2]: 21 As an example of how little ready money is required in true commercial opera- tions, I give below a statement by one of the largest London houses of its yearly receipts and payments. Its transactions during the year 1856, extending to many millions of pounds sterling, are here reduced to the scale of one million.

[^3]: a In the 3rd and 4th German editions there follows this text: "The farmer, for example, sells this wheat for £2, and this money serves thus as the medium of circulation. On the day when the payment falls due, he uses it to pay for linen which the weaver has deliv- ered. The same £2 now functions as the means of payment. The weaver now buys a Bi- ble for cash. This functions again as the medium of circulation, and so on."





**[p. 151]**

sphere of the circulation of commodities. It becomes the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of all contracts.1' Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed from payments in kind into money payments. To what extent this transformation depends upon the general conditions of production, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the Roman Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy all contributions in money. The unspeakable misery of the French ag- ricultural population under Louis XIV, a misery so eloquently de- nounced by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban,128 and others, was due not only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes in kind into money taxes.2' In Asia, on the other hand, the fact that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in kind, depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with the regularity of natural phenomena. And this mode of payment tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production. It is one of the secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans, should lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will be all up with the exemplary agriculture

[^1]: Receipts Payments

[^2]: Bankers' and Merchants' Bills payable after date £302,674 Bills payable after

[^3]: £533,596 Cheques on London Bankers Cheques on Bankers, &c,

[^4]: £533,596 Cheques on London Bankers 663,672 payable on demand 357,715 Bank of England Country Notes 9,627 Notes 22,743 Bank of England Notes 68,554 Gold 9,427 Gold 28,089 Silver and Copper . . . 1,484 Silver and Copper . . . 1,486 Post Office Orders . . . 933

[^5]: Total £1,000,000 Total £1,000,000

[^6]: Report from the Select Committee on the Bank Acts, July, 1858, p. lxxi. " "The course of trade being thus turned, from exchanging of goods for goods, or delivering and taking, to selling and paying, all the bargains are now stated upon the foot of a Price in money" ([D. Defoe,] An Essay upon Publick Credit, 3rd Ed., Lon- don, 1710, p. 8).

[^7]: 21 "Money has become the executioner of all things." Finance is the "alembic that evaporates a frightful quantity of goods and commodities in order to obtain this fatal extract." "Money [] declares war [] on the whole human race" (Boisguille- bert, Dissertations sur la nature des richesses, de l'argent et des tributs. Edit. Daire. Economis- tes financiers, Paris, 1843, t.i, pp. 413, 419, 417 [, 418]).





**[p. 152]**

In every country, certain days of the year become by habit recog- nised settling days for various large and recurrent payments. These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel of reproduc- tion, on conditions closely connected with the seasons. They also reg- ulate the dates for payments that have no direct connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, rents, and so on. The quan- tity of money requisite to make the payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes periodical, though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy of the medium of payment.1'

From the law of the rapidity of currency of the means of payment, it follows that the quantity of the means of payment required for all periodical payments, whatever their source, is in inverse propor- tion 129 to the length of their periods.25

The development of money into a medium of payment makes it nec- essary to accumulate money against the dates fixed for the payment of the sums owing. While hoarding, as a distinct mode of acquiring

1 "On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr. Craig before the Commons' Committee of 1826, "there was such an immense demand for notes upon the banks of Edinburgh, that by 11 o'clock they had not a note left in their custody. They sent round to all the different banks to borrow, but could not get them, and many of the transactions were adjusted by slips of paper only; yet by three o'clock the whole of the notes were returned into the banks from which they had issued! It was a mere transfer from hand to hand." Although the average effective circulation of banknotes in Scotland is less than three millions sterling, yet on certain pay days in the year, every single note in the pos- session of the bankers, amounting in the whole to about £7,000,000, is called into activ- ity. On these occasions the notes have a single and specific function to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they flow back into the various banks from which they issued.(See John Fullarton, [On the] Regulation of Currencies, London, 1844, p. 85, note.) In explanation it should be stated, that in Scotland, at the date of Fullarton's work, notes and not cheques were used to withdraw deposits.

[^1]: 1 To the question, "If there were occasion to raise 40 millions p. a., whether the same 6 millions" (gold) "would suffice for such revolutions and circulations thereof, as trade requires," Petty replies in his usual masterly manner, "I answer yes: for the ex- pense being 40 millions, if the revolutions were in such short circles, viz. weekly, as hap- pens among poor artisans and labourers, who receive and pay every Saturday, then J^ parts of 1 million of money would answer these ends; but if the circles be quarter- ly, according to our custom of paying rent, and gathering taxes, then 10 millions were requisite. Wherefore, supposing payments in general to be of a mixed circle between one week and 13, then add 10 millions to j~2 > the half of which will be 5^, so as if we have 5~y millions we have enough" (William Petty, Political Anatomy of Ire- land, 1672, Edit.: London, 1691, pp. 13, 14).130



