---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "c. Universal Money "
Page_Range: "165-169"
---

# c. Universal Money 



**[p. 153]**

riches, vanishes with the progress of civil society, the formation of re- serves of the means of payment grows with that progress.

c. Universal Money"

When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips off the local garbs which it there assumes, of a standard of prices, of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its original form of bullion. In the trade between the markets of the world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be universally recognised. Hence their independent value form also, in these cases, confronts them under the shape of universal money. It is only in the markets of the world that money acquires to the full extent the character of the com- modity whose bodily form is also the immediate social incarnation of human labour in the abstract. Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately corresponds to its ideal concept.

Within the sphere of home circulation, there can be but one com- modity which, by serving as a measure of value, becomes money. In the markets of the world a double measure of value holds sway, gold and silver.'

[^1]: 1 Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of a country shall form reserves ofthat precious metal alone which circulates at home. The "pleasant dif- ficulties" ' 3 ' thus self-created by the Bank of England, are well known. On the subject of the great epochs in the history of the changes in the relative value of gold and silver, see Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 136 sq. [present edition, Vol. 29, p. 387 sq.]. Sir Robert Peel, by his Bank Act of 1844, sought to tide over the difficulty, by allowing the Bank of Eng- land to issue notes against silver bullion, on condition that the reserve of silver should never exceed more than one-fourth of the reserve of gold. The value of silver being for that purpose estimated at its price in the London market. // Added in the 4th German edi- tion.— We find ourselves once more in a period of serious change in the relative values of gold and silver. About 25 years ago the ratio expressing the relative value of gold and silver was 15 2 : 1; now it is approximately 22 : 1, and silver is still constantly falling as against gold. This is essentially the result of a revolution in the mode of production of both metals. Formerly gold was obtained almost exclusively by washing it out from gold-bearing alluvial deposits, products of the weathering of auriferous rocks. Now this method has become inadequate and has been forced into the background by the pro- cessing of the quartz lodes themselves, a way of extraction which formerly was only of secondary importance, although well known to the ancients (Diodorus, III, 12-14) [Diodor's v. Sicilien Historische Bibliothek, Book III, 12-14, Stuttgart, 1828, pp. 258-61]. Moreover, not only were new huge silver deposits discovered in North America, in the Western part of the Rocky Mountains, but these and the Mexican sil- ver mines were really opened up by the laying of railways, which made possible the

[^2]: a In the German editions "Money of the world".





**[p. 154]**

shipment of modern machinery and fuel and in consequence the mining of silver on a very large scale at a low cost. However, there is a great difference in the way the two metals occur in the quartz lodes. The gold is mostly native, but disseminated through- out the quartz in minute quantities. The whole mass of the vein must therefore be crushed and the gold either washed out or extracted by means of mercury. Often 1,000,000 grammes of quartz barely yield 1-3 and very seldom 30-60 grammes of gold. Silver is seldom found native; however, it occurs in special quartz that is separated from the lode with comparative ease and contains mostly 40-90% silver; or it is con- tained, in smaller quantities, in copper, lead and other ores which in themselves are worthwhile working. From this alone it is apparent that the labour expended on the production of gold is rather increasing while that expended on silver production has decidedly decreased, which quite naturally explains the drop in the value of the latter. This fall in value would express itself in a still greater fall in price if the price of silver were not pegged even today by artificial means. But America's rich silver deposits have so far barely been tapped, and thus the prospects are that the value of this metal will keep on dropping for rather a long time to come. A still greater contributing factor here is the relative decrease in the requirement of silver for articles of general use and for luxuries, that is its replacement by plated goods, aluminium, etc. One may thus gauge the utopianism of the bimetallist idea ' 3 Z that compulsory international quota- tion will raise silver again to the old value ratio of 1 : 154-. It is more likely that sil- ver will forfeit its money function more and more in the markets of the world.— F. E.jj

[^1]: 1 The opponents, themselves, of the mercantile system,61 a system which consid- ered the settlement of surplus trade balances in gold and silver as the aim of internatio- nal trade, entirely misconceived the functions of money of the world. I have shown by the example of Ricardo in what way their false conception of the laws that regulate the quantity of the circulating medium, is reflected in their equally false conception of the international movement of the precious metals (1. c., pp. 150 sq. [present edition, Vol. 29, p. 399 sq.]). His erroneous dogma: "An unfavourable balance of trade never arises but from a redundant currency The exportation of the coin is caused by its cheapness, and is not the effect, but the cause of an unfavourable balance," 133 already occurs in Barbon: "The Balance of Trade, if there be one, is not the cause of sending away the money out of a nation; but that proceeds from the difference of the value of bullion in every country" (N. Barbon, 1. c, pp. 59, 60). Mac Culloch in The Literature of Political Economy: A Classified Catalogue, London, 1845 [p. 157], praises Barbon for this anticipation, but prudently passes over the naive forms, in which Barbon clothes the absurd supposition on which the "currency principle" 134 is based. The absence of real criticism and even of honesty, in that catalogue culminates in the sections devot- ed to the history of the theory of money; the reason is that Mac Culloch in this part of the work is flattering Lord Overstone whom he calls "facile princeps argentariorum" a

[^2]: [I.e., p. 181].

[^3]: a recognized king of the money merchants





**[p. 155]**

Just as every country needs a reserve of money for its home circula- tion, so, too, it requires one for external circulation in the markets of the world. The functions of hoards, therefore, arise in part out of the function of money, as the medium of the home circulation and home payments, and in part out of its function of money of the world.21 For this latter function, the genuine money commodity, actual gold and silver, is necessary. On that account, Sir James Steuart, in order to distinguish them from their purely local substitutes, calls gold and silver "money of the world".135

The current of the stream of gold and silver is a double one. On the one hand, it spreads itself from its sources over all the markets of the world, in order to become absorbed, to various extents, into the differ- ent national spheres of circulation, to fill the conduits of currency, to replace abraded gold and silver coins, to supply the material of arti- cles of luxury, and to petrify into hoards.3' This first current is started

[^1]: " For instance, in subsidies, money loans for carrying on wars or for enabling banks to resume cash payments, &c, it is the money form, and no other, of value that may be wanted.

[^2]: T> "I would desire, indeed, no more convincing evidence of the competency of the machinery of the hoards in specie-paying countries to perform every necessary office of international adjustment, without any sensible aid from the general circulation, than the facility with which France, when but just recovering from the shock of a destructive foreign invasion, completed within the space of 27 months the payment of her forced contribution of nearly 20 millions to the allied powers, and a considerable proportion of the sum in specie, without any perceptible contraction or derangement of her do- mestic currency, or even any alarming fluctuation of her exchanges" (Fullarton, I.e., p. 131).// Added in the 4th German edition.— We have a still more striking example in the facility with which the same France was able in 1871-73 to pay off within 30 months a forced contribution more than ten times as great, a considerable part of it likewise in specie.— F. E.//

[^3]: 31 "Money is shared among the nations in accordance with their need for it as it is always attracted by the products" (Le Trosne, 1. c, p. 916). "The mines which are continually giving gold and silver, do give sufficient to supply such a needful balance to every nation" (J. Vanderlint, 1. c , p. 40).





**[p. 156]**

Countries in which the bourgeois form of production is developed to a certain extent, limit the hoards concentrated in the strong rooms of the banks to the minimum required for the proper performance of their peculiar functions.2 Whenever these hoards are strikingly above their average level, it is, with some exceptions, an indication of stag- nation in the circulation of commodities, of an interruption in the even flow of their metamorphoses.3

[^1]: 1 "Exchanges rise and fall every week, and at some particular times in the year run high against a nation, and at other times run as high on the contrary" (N. Barbon,

[^2]: 1. c, p. 39).

[^3]: 2 These various functions are liable to come into dangerous conflict with one an- other whenever gold and silver have also to serve as a fund for the conversion of bank- notes.

[^4]: 3 "What money is more than of absolute necessity for a Home Trade, is dead stock and brings no profit to that country it's kept in, but as it is transported in trade, as well as imported" (John Bellers, Essays, p. 13). "What if we have too much coin? We may melt down the heaviest and turn it into the splendour of plate, vessels or utensils of gold or silver, or send it out as a commodity, where the same is wanted or desired; or let it out at interest, where interest is high" (W. Petty, Quantulumcunque, p. 39). "Money is but the fat of the Body Politick, whereof too much doth as often hinder its agility, as too little makes it sick as fat lubricates the motion of the muscles, feeds in want of vic- tuals, fills up the uneven cavities, and beautifies the body; so doth money in the state quicken its action, feeds from abroad in time of dearth at home; evens accounts and beautifies the whole; altho' more especially the particular persons that have it in plen- ty" (W. Petty, Political Anatomy of Ireland, [p]p. 14 [, 15]).130



