---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "b. Prolongation of the Working Day "
Page_Range: "418-424"
---

# b. Prolongation of the Working Day 



**[p. 406]**

b. Prolongation of the Working Day

If machinery be the most powerful means for increasing the pro- ductiveness of labour — i.e., for shortening the working time re- quired in the production of a commodity, it becomes in the hands of capital the most powerful means, in those industries first invaded by it, for lengthening the working day beyond all bounds set by human na- ture. It creates, on the one hand, new conditions by which capital is enabled to give free scope to this its constant tendency, and on the other hand, new motives with which to whet capital's appetite for the labour of others.

In the first place, in the form of machinery, the implements of la- bour become automatic, things moving and working independent of the workman. They are thenceforth an industrial perpetuum mobile, that would go on producing forever, did it not meet with certain na- tural obstructions in the weak bodies and the strong wills of its human attendants. The automaton, as capital, and because it is capital, is en- dowed, in the person of the capitalist, with intelligence and will; it is therefore animated by the longing to reduce to a minimum the resis- tance offered by that repellent yet elastic natural barrier, man.1' This resistance is moreover lessened by the apparent lightness of machine work, and by the more pliant and docile character of the women and children employed on it.2'

[^1]: so than unmarried females, and are compelled to use their utmost exertions to procure the necessaries of life. Thus are the virtues, the peculiar virtues of the female character to be perverted to her injury— thus all that is most dutiful and tender in her nature is made a means of her bondage and suf Fering" (Ten Hours' Factory Bill. The Speech of Lord Ashley, March 15th, Lond., 1844, p. 20).

[^2]: " "Since the general introduction of machinery, human nature has been forced far beyond its average strength" (Rob. Owen, Observations on the Effects of the Manufacturing System, 2nd Ed., London, 1817, [p. 16]).

[^3]: 21 The English, who have a tendency to look upon the earliest form of appearance of a thing as the cause of its existence, are in the habit of attributing the long hours of work in factories to the extensive kidnapping of children, practised by capitalists in the infancy of the factory system, in workhouses and orphanages, by means of which rob- bery, unresisting material for exploitation was procured. Thus, for instance, Fielden, himself a manufacturer, says: "It is evident that the long hours of work were brought about by the circumstance of so great a number of destitute children being supplied from different parts of the country, that the masters were independent of the hands, and that having once established the custom by means of the miserable materials they had procured in this way, they could impose it on their neighbours with the greater fa- cility" (J. Fielden, The Curse of the Factory System, Lond., 1836, p. 11). With reference to the labour of women, Saunders, the factory inspector, says in his report of 1844:





**[p. 407]**

The productiveness of machinery is, as we saw, inversely propor- tional to the value transferred by it to the product. The longer the life of the machine, the greater is the mass of the products over which the value transmitted by the machine is spread, and the less is the portion of that value added to each single commodity. The active lifetime of a machine is, however, clearly dependent on the length of the work- ing day, or on the duration of the daily labour process multiplied by the number of days for which the process is carried on.

The wear and tear of a machine is not exactly proportional to its working time. And even if it were so, a machine working 16 hours daily for 7^ years, covers as long a working period as, and trans- mits to the total product no more value than, the same machine would if it worked only 8 hours daily for 15 years. But in the first case the value of the machine would be reproduced twice as quickly as in the latter, and the capitalist would, by this use of the machine, absorb in 7 "2 years as much surplus value as in the second case he would in 15.

The material wear and tear of a machine is of two kinds. The one arises from use, as coins wear away by circulating, the other from nonuse, as a sword rusts when left in its scabbard. The latter kind is due to the elements. The former is more or less directly proportional, the latter to a certain extent inversely proportional, to the use of the machine.1'

But in addition to the material wear and tear, a machine also undergoes, what we may call a moral depreciation. It loses exchange value, either by machines of the same sort being produced cheaper than it, or by better machines entering into competition with it.2' In both cases, be the machine ever so young and full of life, its value is no longer determined by the labour actually materialised in it, but by the labour time requisite to reproduce either it or the better machine.

[^1]: "Amongst the female operatives there are some women who, for many weeks in succes- sion, except for a few days, are employed from 6 a. m. till midnight, with less than 2 hours for meals, so that on 5 days of the week they have only 6 hours left out of the 24, for going to and from their homes and resting in bed." 338

[^2]: 11 "Occasion injury to the delicate moving parts of metallic mechanism by inac- tion" (Ure, I.e., p. 281).

[^3]: v The Manchester Spinner (Times, 26th Nov., 1862 [p. 12, col. 1]), before referred to [this volume, p. 21V, note 2] says in relation to this subject: "It (namely, the "al- lowance for deterioration of machinery") is also intended to cover the loss which is con- stantly arising from the superseding of machines before they are worn out, by others of a new and better construction."





**[p. 408]**

It has, therefore, lost value more or less. The shorter the period taken to reproduce its total value, the less is the danger of moral deprecia- tion; and the longer the working day, the shorter is that period. When machinery is first introduced into an industry, new methods of repro- ducing it more cheaply follow blow upon blow,l; and so do improve- ments, that not only affect individual parts and details of the mach- ine, but its entire build. It is, therefore, in the early days of the life of machinery that this special incentive to the prolongation of the work- ing day makes itself felt most acutely.2'

Given the length of the working day, all other circumstances re- maining the same, the exploitation of double the number of workmen demands, not only a doubling ofthat part of constant capital which is invested in machinery and buildings, but also of that part which is laid out in raw material and auxiliary substances. The lengthening of the working day, on the other hand, allows of production on an ex- tended scale without any alteration in the amount of capital laid out on machinery and buildings.3' Not only is there, therefore, an in- crease of surplus value, but the outlay necessary to obtain it di- minishes. It is true that this takes place, more or less, with every leng- thening of the working day; but in the case under consideration, the change is more marked, because the capital converted into the instru- ments of labour preponderates to a greater degree.4' The develop- ment of the factory system fixes a constantly increasing portion of the

[^1]: " "It has been estimated, roughly, that the first individual of a newly-invented machine will cost about five times as much as the construction of the second" (Babb- age, I.e., pp. 211-12).

[^2]: 2! "The improvements which took place not long ago in frames for making patent net were so great that a machine in good repair which had cost £1,200, sold a few years after for £60 improvements succeeded each other so rapidly, that machines which had never been finished were abandoned in the hands of their makers, because new im- provements had superseded their utility" (Babbage, I.e., p. 233). In these stormy, go- ahead times,17? therefore, the tulle manufacturers soon extended the working day, by means of double sets of hands, from the original 8 hours to 24.

[^3]: 31 "It is self-evident, that, amid the ebbings and flowings of the markets and the al- ternate expansions and contractions of demand, occasions will constantly recur, in which the manufacturer may employ additional floating capital without employing additional fixed capital if additional quantities of raw material can be worked up without incurring an additional expense for buildings and machinery" (R. Torrens, On Wages and Combination, London, 1834, p. 64).

[^4]: 4 This circumstance is mentioned only for the sake of completeness, for I shall not consider the rate of profit, i.e., the ratio of the surplus value to the total capital ad- vanced, until I come to the third book.





**[p. 409]**

capital in a form, in which, on the one hand, its value is capable of continual self-expansion, and in which, on the other hand, it loses both use value and exchange value whenever it loses contact with liv- ing labour. "When a labourer," said Mr. Ashworth, a cotton mag- nate, to Professor Nassau W. Senior, "lays down his spade, he renders useless, for that period, a capital worth eighteenpence. When one of our people leaves the mill, he renders useless a capital that has cost £100." 1; Only fancy! making "useless" for a single moment, a capital that has cost £100! It is, in truth, monstrous, that a single one of our people should ever leave the factory! The increased use of machinery, as Senior after the instruction he received from Ashworth clearly per- ceives, makes a constantly increasing lengthening of the working day "desirable."2;

Machinery produces relative surplus value; not only by directly de- preciating the value of labour power, and by indirectly cheapening the same through cheapening the commodities that enter into its re- production, but also, when it is first introduced sporadically into an industry, by converting the labour employed by the owner of that machinery, into labour of a higher degree and greater efficacy, by raising the social value of the article produced above its individual value, and thus enabling the capitalist to replace the value of a day's labour power by a smaller portion of the value of a day's product. During this transition period, when the use of machinery is a sort of monopoly, the profits are therefore exceptional, and the capitalist endeavours to exploit thoroughly "the sunny time of this his first love",339 by prolonging the working day as much as possible. The magnitude of the profit whets his appetite for more profit.

As the use of machinery becomes more general in a particular industry, the social value of the product sinks down to its individual value, and the law that surplus value does not arise from the labour power that has been replaced by the machinery, but from the labour

[^1]: l; Senior, "Letters on the Factory Act", London, 1837, p. 14. 2 "The great proportion of fixed to circulating capital makes long hours of work desirable." With the increased use of machinery, &c, "the motives to long hours of work will become greater, as the only means by which a large proportion of fixed capi- tal can be made profitable" (I.e., pp. 11-13). "There are certain expenses upon a mill which go on in the same proportion whether the mill be running short or full time, as, for instance, rent, rates, and taxes, insurance against fire, wages of several permanent servants, deterioration of machinery, with various other charges upon a manufacturing establishment, the proportion of which to profits increases as the production decreases" ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862", p. 19).





**[p. 410]**

power actually employed in working with the machinery, asserts it- self. Surplus value arises from variable capital alone, and we saw that the amount of surplus value depends on two factors, viz., the rate of surplus value and the number of the workmen simultaneously em- ployed. Given the length of the working day, the rate of surplus value is determined by the relative duration of the necessary labour and of the surplus labour in a day. The number of the labourers simulta- neously employed depends, on its side, on the ratio of the variable to the constant capital. Now, however much the use of machinery may increase the surplus labour at the expense of the necessary labour by heightening the productiveness of labour, it is clear that it attains this result, only by diminishing the number of workmen employed by a given amount of capital. It converts what was formerly variable cap- ital, invested in labour power, into machinery which, being constant capital, does not produce surplus value. It is impossible, for instance, to squeeze as much surplus value out of 2 as out of 24 labourers. If each of these 24 men gives only one hour of surplus labour in 12, the 24 men give together 24 hours of surplus labour, while 24 hours is the total labour of the two men. Hence, the application of machinery to the production of surplus value implies a contradic- tion which is immanent in it, since of the two factors of the surplus value created by a given amount of capital, one, the rate of surplus value, cannot be increased, except by diminishing the other, the number of workmen. This contradiction comes to light, as soon as by the general employment of machinery in a given industry, the value of the machine-produced commodity regulates the value of all com- modities of the same sort; and it is this contradiction, that in its turn, drives the capitalist, without his being conscious of the fact,1' to exces- sive lengthening of the working day, in order that he may compensate the decrease in the relative number of labourers exploited, by an in- crease not only of the relative, but of the absolute surplus labour. If, then, the capitalistic employment of machinery, on the one hand, supplies new and powerful motives to an excessive lengthening of the working day, and radically changes, as well the methods of la- bour, as also the character of the social working organism, in such a manner as to break down all opposition to this tendency, on the

[^1]: '» Why it is, that the capitalist, and also the political economists who are imbued with his views, are unconscious of this immanent contradiction, will appear from the first part of the third book.





**[p. 411]**

other hand, it produces, partly by opening out to the capitalist new strata of the working class, previously inaccessible to him, partly by setting free the labourers it supplants, a surplus working population,1' which is compelled to submit to the dictation of capital. Hence that remarkable phenomenon in the history of modern industry, that machinery sweeps away every moral and natural restriction on the length of the working day. Hence, too, the economic paradox, that the most powerful instrument for shortening labour time, becomes the most unfailing means for placing every moment of the labourer's time and that of his family, at the disposal of the capitalist for the pur- pose of expanding the value of his capital. "If," dreamed Aristotle, the greatest thinker of antiquity, "if every tool, when summoned, or even of its own accord, could do the work that befits it, just as the creations of Daedalus moved of themselves,341 or the tripods of Hephaestos went of their own accord to their sacred work, if the weavers' shuttles were to weave of themselves, then there would be no need either of apprentices for the master workers, or of slaves for the lords."2' And Antipatros, a Greek poet of the time of Cicero, hailed the invention of the water-wheel for grinding corn, an invention that is the elementary form of all machinery, as the giver of freedom to fe- male slaves, and the bringer back of the golden age.3' Oh! those

[^1]: 11 It is one of the greatest merits of Ricardo to have seen in machinery not only the means of producing commodities, but of creating a "redundant population".340

[^2]: 2> F. Biese, Die Philosophie des Aristoteles, Vol. 2. Berlin, 1842, p. 408. 3) I give below the translation of this poem by Stolberg, because it brings into relief, quite in the spirit of former quotations referring to division of labour, the antithesis be- tween the views of the ancients and the moderns. "Spare the hand that grinds the corn, Oh, miller girls, and softly sleep. Let Chanticleer announce the morn in vain! Deo has commanded the work of the girls to be done by the Nymphs, and now they skip lightly over the wheels, so that the shaken axles revolve with their spokes and pull round the load of the revolving stones. Let us live the life of our fathers, and let us rest from work and enjoy the gifts that the Goddess sends us."

[^3]: "Schonet der mahlenden Hand, o Müllerinnen, und schlafet Sanft! es verkünde der Hahn euch den Morgen umsonst! Däo hat die Arbeit der Mädchen den Nymphen befohlen, Und itzt hüpfen sie leicht über die Räder dahin, Daß die erschütterten Achsen mit ihren Speichen sich wälzen, Und im Kreise die Last drehen des wälzenden Steins. Laßt uns leben das Leben der Väter, und laßt uns der Gaben Arbeitslos uns freun, welche die Göttin uns schenkt."

[^4]: (Gedichte aus dem Griechischen übersetzt von Christian Graf zu Stolberg, Ham- burg, 1782 [p. 312]).



