---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "c. Intensification of Labour "
Page_Range: "424-432"
---

# c. Intensification of Labour 



**[p. 412]**

heathens! They understood, as the learned Bastiat,342 and before him the still wiser Mac Culloch have discovered, nothing of Political Econ- omy and Christianity. They did not, for example, comprehend that machinery is the surest means of lengthening the working day. They perhaps excused the slavery of one on the ground that it was a means to the full development of another. But to preach slavery of the masses, in order that a few crude and half-educated parvenus, might become "eminent spinners", "extensive sausage-makers", and "in- fluential shoe-black dealers", to do this, they lacked the bump of Christianity.

c. Intensification of Labour

The immoderate lengthening of the working day, produced by machinery in the hands of capital, leads to a reaction on the part of society, the very sources of whose life are menaced; and, thence, to a normal working day whose length is fixed by law. Thenceforth a phenomenon that we have already met with, namely, the intensifi- cation of labour, develops into great importance. Our analysis of ab- solute surplus value had reference primarily to the extension of dura- tion of the labour, its intensity being assumed as given. We now pro- ceed to consider the substitution of a more intensified labour for la- bour of more extensive duration, and the degree of the former.

It is self-evident, that in proportion as the use of machinery spreads, and the experience of a special class of workmen habituated to machinery accumulates, the rapidity and intensity of labour increase as a natural consequence. Thus in England, during half a century, leng- thening of the working day went hand in hand with increasing inten- sity of factory labour. Nevertheless the reader will clearly see, that where we have labour, not carried on by fits and starts, but repeated day after day with unvarying uniformity, a point must inevitably be reached, where extension of the working day and intensity of the la- bour mutually exclude one another, in such a way that lengthening of the working day becomes compatible only with a lower degree of in- tensity, and a higher degree of intensity, only with a shortening of the working day. So soon as the gradually surging revolt of the working class compelled Parliament to shorten compulsorily the hours of la- bour, and to begin by imposing a normal working day on factories proper, so soon consequently as an increased production of surplus



**[p. 413]**

value by the prolongation of the working day was once for all put a stop to, from that moment capital threw itself with all its might into the production of relative surplus value, by hastening on the further improvement of machinery. At the same time a change took place in the nature of relative surplus value. Generally speaking, the mode of producing relative surplus value consists in raising the productive power of the workman, so as to enable him to produce more in a given time with the same expenditure of labour. Labour time continues to transmit as before the same value to the total product, but this un- changed amount of exchange value is spread over more use values; hence the value of each single commodity sinks. Otherwise, however, so soon as the compulsory shortening of the hours of labour takes place. The immense impetus it gives to the development of productive power, and to economy in the means of production, imposes on the workman increased expenditure of labour in a given time, heightened tension of labour power, and closer filling up of the pores of the work- ing day, or condensation of labour to a degree that is attainable only within the limits of the shortened working day. This condensation of a greater mass of labour into a given period thenceforward counts for what it really is, a greater quantity of labour. In addition to a meas- ure of its extension, i. e., duration, labour now acquires a measure of its intensity or of the degree of its condensation or density.1' The den- ser hour of the ten hours' working day contains more labour, i. e., ex- pended labour power, than the more porous hour of the twelve hours' working day. The product therefore of one of the former hours has as much or more value than has the product of 1^ of the latter hours. Apart from the increased yield of relative surplus value through the heightened productiveness of labour, the same mass of value is now produced for the capitalist say by 3-^ hours of surplus labour, and 6 -f hours of necessary labour, as was previously pro- duced by four hours of surplus labour and eight hours of necessary labour.

We now come to the question: How is the labour intensified? The first effect of shortening the working day results from the self-

[^1]: 1 There are, of course, always differences in the intensities of the labour in various industries. But these differences are, as Adam Smith has shown, compensated to a par- tial extent by minor circumstances, peculiar to each sort of labour. Labour time, as a measure of value, is not, however, affected in this case, except in so far as the duration of labour, and the degree of its intensity, are two antithetical and mutually exclusive expressions for one and the same quantity of labour.





**[p. 414]**

evident law, that the efficiency of labour power is in an inverse ratio to the duration of its expenditure. Hence, within certain limits what is lost by shortening the duration is gained by the increasing tension of labour power. That the workman moreover really does expend more labour power, is ensured by the mode in which the capitalist pays him.1' In those industries, such as potteries, where machinery plays little or no part, the introduction of the Factory Acts has strikingly shown that the mere shortening of the working day increases to a wonderful degree the regularity, uniformity, order, continuity, and energy of the labour.2' It seemed, however, doubtful whether this ef- fect was produced in the factory proper, where the dependence of the workman on the continuous and uniform motion of the machinery had already created the strictest discipline. Hence, when in 1844 the reduction of the working day to less than twelve hours was being de- bated, the masters almost unanimously declared

"that their overlookers in the different rooms took good care that the hands lost no time", that "the extent of vigilance and attention on the part of the workmen was hardly capable of being increased", and, therefore, that the speed of the machinery and other conditions remaining unaltered, "to expect in a well-managed factory any important result from increased attention of the workmen was an absurdity".S1

This assertion was contradicted by experiments. Mr. Robert Gard- ner reduced the hours of labour in his two large factories at Preston, on and after the 20th April, 1844, from twelve to eleven hours a day. The result of about a year's working was that "the same amount of product for the same cost was received, and the workpeople as a whole earned in eleven hours as much wages as they did before in twelve".4' I pass over the experiments made in the spinning and card- ing rooms, because they were accompanied by an increase of 2% in the speed of the machines [1. c , p. 12]. But in the weaving depart- ment, where, moreover, many sorts of figured fancy articles were wo- ven, there was not the slightest alteration in the conditions of the work. The result was:

[^1]: "From 6th January to 20th April, 1844, with a twelve hours' day, average weekly wages of each hand 10s. ly d., from 20th April to 29th June, 1844, with day of eleven hours, average weekly wages 10s. 3yd." 5

[^2]: " Especially by piece-work, a form we shall investigate in Part VI of this book.3*3

[^3]: 2i See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1865". 31 Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 1844 and the quarter ending 30th April, 1845, pp. 20-21. 41 1. c, p. 19. Since the wages for piece-work were unaltered, the weekly wages de- pended on the quantity produced. •» I.e., p. 20.





**[p. 415]**

Here we have more produced in eleven hours than previously in twelve, and entirely in consequence of more steady application and economy of time by the workpeople. While they got the same wages and gained one hour of spare time, the capitalist got the same amount produced and saved the cost of coal, gas, and other such items, for one hour. Similar experiments, and with the like success, were carried out in the mills of Messrs. Horrocks and Jacson."

The shortening of the hours of labour creates, to begin with, the subjective conditions for the condensation of labour, by enabling the workman to exert more strength in a given time. So soon as that short- ening becomes compulsory, machinery becomes in the hands of capi- tal the objective means, systematically employed for squeezing out more labour in a given time. This is effected in two ways: by in- creasing the speed of the machinery, and by giving the workman more machinery to tent. Improved construction of the machinery is neces- sary, partly because without it greater pressure cannot be put on the workman, and partly because the shortened hours of labour force the capitalist to exercise the strictest watch over the cost of production. The improvements in the steam-engine have increased the piston speed, and at the same time have made it possible, by means of a greater economy of power, to drive with the same or even a smaller consumption of coal more machinery with the same engine. The im- provements in the transmitting mechanism have lessened friction, and, what so strikingly distinguishes modern from the older machin- ery, have reduced the diameter and weight of the shafting to a con- stantly decreasing minimum. Finally, the improvements in the opera- tive machines have, while reducing their size, increased their speed and efficiency, as in the modern power-loom; or, while increasing the size of their framework, have also increased the extent and number of their working parts, as in spinning-mules, or have added to the speed of these working parts by imperceptible alterations of detail, such as those which ten years ago increased the speed of the spindles in self- acting mules by one-fifth.

The reduction of the working day to 12 hours dates in England from 1832. In 1836 a manufacturer stated:

[^1]: " The moral element played an important part in the above experiments. The workpeople told the factory inspector: "We work with more spirit, we have the reward ever before us of getting away sooner at night, and one active and cheerful spirit per- vades the whole mill, from the youngest piecer to the oldest hand, and we can greatly help each other" [Reports,] I.e. [p. 21].





**[p. 416]**

"The labour now undergone in the factories is much greater than it used to be compared with thirty or forty years ago owing to the greater attention and activity required by the greatly increased speed which is given to the machinery." "

In the year 1844, Lord Ashley, now Lord Shaftesbury, made in the House of Commons the following statements, supported by documen- tary evidence:

"The labour performed by those engaged in the processes of manufacture, is three times as great as in the beginning of such operations. Machinery has executed, no doubt, the work that would demand the sinews of millions of men; but it has also prodi- giously multiplied the labour of those who are governed by its fearful movements In 1815, the labour of following a pair of mules spinning cotton of No. 40 — reckoning 12 hours to the working day — involved a necessity of walking 8 miles. In 1832, the dis- tance travelled in following a pair of mules, spinning cotton yarn of the same number, was 20 miles, and frequently more. In 1835" (query—1815 or 1825?) "the spinner put up daily, on each of these mules, 820 stretches, making a total of 1,640 stretches in the course of the day. In 1832, the spinner put up on each mule 2,200 stretches, making a total of 4,400. In 1844, 2,400 stretches, making a total of 4,800; and in some cases the amount of labour required is even still greater I have another document sent to me in 1842, stating that the labour is progressively increasing — increasing not only because the distance to be travelled is greater, but because the quantity of goods produced is multiplied, while the hands are fewer in proportion than before; and, moreover, be- cause an inferior species of cotton is now often spun, which it is more difficult to work In the carding-room there has also been a great increase of labour. One person there does the work formerly divided between two. In the weaving-room, where a vast num- ber of persons are employed, and principally females the labour has increased within the last few years fully 10 per cent., owing to the increased speed of the machinery in spinning. In 1838, the number of hanks spun per week was 18,000, in 1843 it amounted to 21,000. In 1819, the number of picks in power-loom-weaving per minute was 60 — in 1842 it was 140, showing a vast increase of labour."2'

In the face of this remarkable intensity of labour which had al- ready been reached in 1844 under the Twelve Hours' Act, there ap- peared to be a justification for the assertion made at that time by the English manufacturers, that any further progress in that direction was impossible, and therefore that every further reduction of the hours of labour meant a lessened production. The apparent correct- ness of their reasons will be best shown by the following contempo- rary statement by Leonard Horner, the factory inspector, their ever watchful censor.

[^1]: "Now, as the quantity produced must, in the main, be regulated by the speed of the machinery, it must be the interest of the mill-owner to drive it at the utmost rate of

[^2]: '•' John Fielden, I.e. [The Curse of the Factory System], p. 32. 2 Lord Ashley, I.e. [Ten Hours' Factory Bill] pp. 6, 7, 9, passim.





**[p. 417]**

speed consistent with these following conditions, viz., the preservation of the machin- ery from too rapid deterioration; the preservation of the quality of the article manufac- tured; and the capability of the workman to follow the motion without a greater exer- tion than he can sustain for a constancy. One of the most important problems, there- fore, which the owner of a factory has to solve is to find out the maximum speed at which he can run, with a due regard to the above conditions. It frequently happens that he finds he has gone too fast, that breakages and bad work more than counterbal- ance the increased speed, and that he is obliged to slacken his pace. I therefore conclud- ed, that as an active and intelligent mill-owner would find out the safe maximum, it would not be possible to produce as much in eleven hours as in twelve. I further assumed that the operative paid by piecework, would exert himself to the utmost consistent with the power of continuing at the same rate." !!

Horner, therefore, came to the conclusion that a reduction of the working hours below twelve would necessarily diminish production.2' He himself, ten years later, cites his opinion of 1845 in proof of how much he underestimated in that year the elasticity of machinery, and of man's labour power, both of which are simultaneously stretched to an extreme by the compulsory shortening of the working day.

We now come to the period that follows the introduction of the Ten Hours' Act in 1847 into the English cotton, woollen, silk, and flax mills.

James Nasmyth, the eminent civil engineer of Patricroft, near Manchester, explained in a letter to Leonard Horner, written in 1852, the nature of the improvements in the steam-engine that had been made between the years 1848 and 1852. After remarking that the horse-power of steam-engines, being always estimated in the offi- cial returns according to the power of similar engines in 1828,4: is only

[^1]: "The speed of the spindles has increased upon throstles 500, and upon mules 1,000 revolutions a minute, i.e., the speed of the throstle spindle, which in 1839 was 4,500 times a minute, is now (1862) 5,000; and of the mule spindle, that was 5,000, is now 6,000 times a minute, amounting in the former case to one-tenth, and in the second case to one-sixth additional increase."31

[^2]: " Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for Quarter ending 30th September, 1844, and from 1st October, 1844, to 30th April, 1845, p. 20.

[^3]: '» I.e., p. 22. 3> "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1862", p. 62. * This was altered in the "Parliamentary Return" of 1862.344 In it the actual horse power of the modern steam-engines and water-wheels appears in place of the nom- inal [see this volume, p. 392, Engels' note 1]. The doubling spindles, too, are no longer included in the spinning spindles (as was the case in the "Returns" [Factories. Return to an Address] of 1839, 1850, and 1856); further, in the case of woollen mills, the num- ber of "gigs" is added, a distinction made between jute and hemp mills on the one





**[p. 418]**

nominal, and can serve only as an index of their real power, he goes on to say:

"I am confident that from the same weight of steam-engine machinery, we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent, more duty or work performed on the average, and that in many cases the identical steam-engines which in the days of the restricted speed of 220 feet per minute, yielded 50 horse-power, are now yielding upwards of 100" "The modern steam-engine of 100 horse-power is capable of being driven at a much greater force than formerly, arising from improvements in its construction, the capacity and construction of the boilers, &c" "Although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery." '• "In the year 1850, the factories of the United King- dom employed 134,217 nominal horse-power to give motion to 25,638,716 spindles and 301,445 looms. The number of spindles and looms in 1856 was respectively 33,503,580 of the former, and 369,205 of the latter, which, reckoning the force of the nominal horse-power required to be the same as in 1850, would require a force equal to 175,000 horses, but the actual power given in the return for 1856 is 161,435, less by above 10,000 horses than, calculating upon the basis of the return of 1850, the factories ought to have required in 1856." 2; "The facts thus brought out by the Return (of 1856) 345 appear to be that the factory system is increasing rapidly; that although the same number of hands are employed in proportion to the horse-power as at former periods, there are fewer hands employed in proportion to the machinery; that the steam-engine is enabled to drive an increased weight of machinery by economy of force and other methods, and that an increased quantity of work can be turned off by improvements in machinery, and in methods of manufacture, by increase of speed of the machinery, and by a variety of other causes."3

One fact is sufficient to show how greatly the wealth of the ma- nufacturers increased along with the more intense exploitation of la- bour power. From 1838 to 1850, the average proportional346 in- crease in English cotton and other factories was 32, while from 1850 to 1856 it amounted to 86.

But however great the progress of English industry had been dur-

[^1]: "The great improvements made in machines of every kind have raised their pro- ductive power very much. Without any doubt, the shortening of the hours of labour gave the impulse to these improvements. The latter, combined with the more intense strain on the workman, have had the effect, that at least as much is produced in the shortened (by two hours or one-sixth) working day as was previously produced during the longer one."4'

[^2]: hand and flax mills on the other, and finally stocking-weaving is for the first time insert- ed in the report.

[^3]: ' "Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st October, 1856", pp. 13-14 and 20. 2 I.e., pp. 14-15. <; I.e., p. 20. 4 "Reports, &c, for 31st October, 1858", p. 9. Compare "Reports. &c, for 30th April, 1860", p. 30, sqq.





**[p. 419]**

ing the 8 years from 1848 to 1856 under the influence of a working day of 10 hours, it was far surpassed during the next period of 6 years from 1856 to 1862. In silk factories, for instance, there were in 1856, spindles 1,093,799; in 1862, 1,388,544; in 1856, looms 9,260; in 1862, 10,709. But the number of operatives was, in 1856, 56,137; in 1862, 52,429. The increase in the spindles was therefore 26.9% and in the looms 15.6%, while the number of the operatives decreased 7%. In the year 1850 there were employed in worsted mills 875,830 spindles; in 1856, 1,324,549 (increase 51.2%), and in 1862, 1,289,172 (de- crease 2.7%). But if we deduct the doubling spindles that figure in the numbers for 1856, but not in those for 1862, it will be found that after 1856 the number of spindles remained nearly stationary. On the other hand, after 1850, the speed of the spindles and looms was in many cases doubled. The number of power-looms in worsted mills was, in 1850, 32,617; in 1856, 38,956; in 1862, 43,048. The number of the operatives was, in 1850, 79,737; in 1856, 87,794; in 1862, 86,063; included in these, however, the children under 14 years of age were, in 1850, 9,956; in 1856, 11,228; in 1862, 13,178. In spite, therefore, of the greatly increased number of looms in 1862, compared with 1856, the total number of the workpeople employed decreased, and that of the children exploited increased."

On the 27th April, 1863, Mr. Ferrand said in the House of Com- mons:

[^1]: "I have been informed by delegates from 16 districts of Lancashire and Cheshire, in whose behalf I speak, that the work in the factories is, in consequence of the improve- ments in machinery, constantly on the increase. Instead of as formerly one person with two helps tenting two looms, one person now tents three looms without helps, and it is no uncommon thing for one person to tent four. Twelve hours' work, as is evident from the facts adduced, is now compressed into less than 10 hours. It is therefore self-evident, to what an enormous extent the toil of the factory operative has increased during the last 10 years." z' 3 4 7

[^2]: " "Reports of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct., 1862", pp. 100, 103, 129 and 130. 21 On 2 modern power-looms a weaver now makes in a week of 60 hours 26 pieces of certain quality, length, and breadth; while on the old power-looms he could make no more than 4 such pieces. The cost of weaving a piece of such cloth had already soon after 1850 fallen from 2s. 9d. to 5~§"d. [see The Industry of Nations. Part II. London, 1855, p. 156].

[^3]: "Thirty years ago (1841) one spinner with three piecers was not required to attend to more than one pair of mules with 300-324 spindles. At the present time (1871) he has to mind with the help of 5 piecers 2,200 spindles, and produces not less than seven times as much yarn as in 1841" (Alex. Redgrave, Factory Inspector — in the Journal [of the Society] of Arts, 5th January, 1872 [p. 134]).



