---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "a. Overthrow of Co- operation Based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour "
Page_Range: "474-476"
---

# a. Overthrow of Co- operation Based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour 



**[p. 462]**

SECTION 8.— REVOLUTION EFFECTED IN MANUFACTURE,

HANDICRAFTS, AND DOMESTIC INDUSTRY

BY MODERN INDUSTRY

a. Overthrow of Co-operation Based on Handicraft and on the Division of Labour

We have seen how machinery does away with co-operation based on handicrafts, and with manufacture based on the division of hand- icraft labour. An example of the first sort is the mowing-machine; it replaces co-operation between mowers. A striking example of the sec-

[^1]: " In an appeal, dated 1863, of the factory operatives of Lancashire, &c, for the pur- pose of forming a society for organised emigration, we find the following: "That a large emigration of factory workers is now absolutely essential to raise them from their pre- sent prostrate condition, few will deny; but to show that a continuous stream of emigra- tion is at all times demanded, and, without which it is impossible for them to maintain their position in ordinary times, we beg to call attention to the subjoined facts: — In 1814 the official value of cotton goods exported was £17,665,378, whilst the real mar- ketable value was £20,070,824. In 1858 the official value of cotton goods exported, was £182,221,681; but the real or marketable value was only £43,001,322, being a ten-fold quantity sold for little more than double the former price. To produce results so disad- vantageous to the country generally, and to the factory workers in particular, several causes have co-operated, which, had circumstances permitted, we should have brought more prominently under your notice; suffice it for the present to say that the most ob- vious one is the constant redundancy of labour, without which a trade so ruinous in its effects never could have been carried on, and which requires a constantly extending market to save it from annihilation. Our cotton mills may be brought to a stand by the periodical stagnations of trade, which, under present arrangements, are as inevitable as death itself; but the human mind is constantly at work, and although we believe we are under the mark in stating that six millions of persons have left these shores during the last 25 years, yet, from the natural increase of population, and the displacement of la- bour to cheapen production, a large percentage of the male adults in the most pros- perous times find it impossible to obtain work in factories on any conditions whatever" ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 30th April 1863", pp. 51-52). We shall, in a later chapter





**[p. 463]**

ond kind, is the needle-making machine. According to Adam Smith, 10 men, in his day, made in co-operation, over 48,000 needles a-day.389 On the other hand, a single needle-machine makes 145,200 in a working day of 11 hours. One woman or one girl superintends four such machines, and so produces near upon 600,000 needles in a day, and upwards of 3,000,000 in a week.1; A single machine, when it takes the place of co-operation or of manufacture, may itself serve as the basis of an industry of a handicraft character. Still, such a return to handicrafts is but a transition to the factory system, which, as a rule, makes its appearance so soon as the human muscles are re- placed, for the purpose of driving the machines, by a mechanical mo- tive power, such as steam or water. Here and there, but in any case only for a time, an industry may be carried on, on a small scale, by means of mechanical power. This is effected by hiring steam-power, as is done in some of the Birmingham trades, or by the use of small ca- loric-engines, as in some branches of weaving.2' In the Coventry silk weaving industry the experiment of "cottage factories" was tried. In the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an engine- house was built and the engine connected by shafts with the looms in the cottages.390 In all cases the power was hired at so much per loom. The rent was payable weekly, whether the looms worked or not. Each cottage held from 2 to 6 looms; some belonged to the weaver, some were bought on credit, some were hired. The struggle between these cottage factories and the factory proper, lasted over 12 years. It end- ed with the complete ruin of the 300 cottage factories.31 Wherever the nature of the process did not involve production on a large scale, the new industries that have sprung up in the last few decades, such as envelope making, steel-pen making, &c, have, as a general rule, first passed through the handicraft stage, and then the manufacturing stage, as short phases of transition to the factory stage. The transition is very difficult in those cases where the production of the article by manufacture consists, not of a series of graduated processes, but of

[^1]: [this volume, pp. 574-76], see how our friends, the manufacturers, endeavoured, du- ring the catastrophe in the cotton trade, to prevent hy every means, including State in- terference, the emigration of the operatives.

[^2]: 1 "Ch. Empl. Comm. III. Report, 1864", p. 108, n. 447. 2 In the United States the restoration, in this way, of handicrafts based on machin- ery is frequent; and therefore, when the inevitable transition to the factory system shall take place, the ensuing concentration will, compared with Europe and even with Eng- land, stride on in seven-league boots.

[^3]: 3 See "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865", p. 64.



