---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "b. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries "
Page_Range: "476-478"
---

# b. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries 



**[p. 464]**

a great number of disconnected ones. This circumstance formed a great hindrance to the establishment of steel-pen factories. Never- theless, about 15 years ago, a machine was invented that automati- cally performed 6 separate operations at once. The first steel-pens were supplied by the handicraft system, in the year 1820, at £7 4s. the gross; in 1830 they were supplied by manufacture at 8s., and to- day the factory system supplies them to the trade at from 2s. to 6d. the gross.1; 391

b. Reaction of the Factory System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries

Along with the development of the factory system and of the revo- lution in agriculture that accompanies it, production in all the other branches of industry not only extends, but alters its character. The principle, carried out in the factory system, of analysing the process of production into its constituent phases, and of solving the problems thus proposed by the application of mechanics, of chemistry, and of the whole range of the natural sciences, becomes the determining principle everywhere. Hence, machinery squeezes itself into the manufacturing industries first for one detail process, then for another. Thus the solid crystal of their organisation, based on the old division of labour, becomes dissolved, and makes way for constant changes. Independently of this, a radical change takes place in the composi- tion of the collective labourer, a change of the persons working in combination. In contrast with the manufacturing period, the division of labour is thenceforth based, wherever possible, on the employment of women, of children of all ages, and of unskilled labourers, in one word, on cheap labour, as it is characteristically called in England. This is the case not only with all production on a large scale, whether employing machinery or not, but also with the so-called domestic in- dustry, whether carried on in the houses of the workpeople or in small workshops. This modern so-called domestic industry has nothing, ex-

[^1]: ' Mr. Gillott erected in Birmingham the first steel-pen factory on a large scale. It produced, so early as 1851, over 180,000,000 of pens yearly, and consumed 120 tons of steel. Birmingham has the monopoly of this industry in the United Kingdom, and at present produces thousands of millions of steel-pens.392 According to the Census of 1861 [XXXVIII] the number of persons employed was 1,428, of whom 1,268 females from 5 years of age upwards.





**[p. 465]**

cept the name, in common with the old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of which presupposes independent urban handicrafts, independent peasant farming, and above all, a dwelling-house for the labourer and his family. That old-fashioned industry has now been converted into an outside department of the factory, the manufac- tory, or the warehouse. Besides the factory operatives, the manufac- turing workmen and the handicraftsmen, whom it concentrates in large masses at one spot, and directly commands, capital also sets in motion, by means of invisible threads, another army; that of the workers in the domestic industries, who dwell in the large towns and are also scattered over the face of the country. An example: The shirt factory of Messrs. Tillie at Londonderry, which employs 1,000 opera- tives in the factory itself, and 9,000 people spread up and down the country and working in their own houses.'

The exploitation of cheap and immature labour power is carried out in a more shameless manner in modern manufacture than in the factory proper. This is because the technical foundation of the factory system, namely, the substitution of machines for muscular power, and the light character of the labour, is almost entirely absent in manu- facture, and at the same time women and over-young children are subjected, in a most unconscionable way, to the influence of poi- sonous or injurious substances. This exploitation is more shameless in the so-called domestic industry than in manufactures, and that be- cause the power of resistance in the labourers decreases with their dis- semination; because a whole series of plundering parasites insinuate themselves between the employer and the workman; because a do- mestic industry has always to compete either with the factory system, or with manufacturing in the same branch of production; because pov- erty robs the workman of the conditions most essential to his labour, of space, light and ventilation; because employment becomes more and more irregular; and, finally, because in these the last resorts of the masses made "redundant" by modern industry and agriculture, competition for work attains its maximum. Economy in the means of production, first systematically carried out in the factory system, and there, from the very beginning, coincident with the most reckless squandering of labour power, and robbery of the conditions normally requisite for labour—this economy nowsshows its antagonistic and murderous side more and more in a given branch of industry, the less

[^1]: " "Ch. Empl. Comm. II. Rep. 1864", p. LXVIII, n. 415.



