---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "c. Modern Manufacture "
Page_Range: "478-480"
---

# c. Modern Manufacture 



**[p. 466]**

c. Modern Manufacture

I now proceed, by a few examples, to illustrate the principles laid down above. As a matter of fact, the reader is already familiar with numerous instances given in the chapter on the working day. In the hardware manufactures of Birmingham and the neighbourhood, there are employed, mostly in very heavy work, 30,000 children and young persons, besides 10,000 women.393 There they are to be seen in the unwholesome brass-foundries, button factories, enamelling, gal- vanising, and lackering works.11 Owing to the excessive labour of their workpeople, both adult and non-adult, certain London houses where newspapers and books are printed, have got the ill-omened name of "slaughterhouses".2' Similar excesses are practised in book- binding, where the victims are chiefly women, girls, and children; young persons have to do heavy work in rope-walks and night-work in salt mines, candle manufactories, and chemical works; young peo- ple are worked to death at turning the looms in silk weaving, when it is not carried on by machinery.3' One of the most shameful, the most dirty, and the worst paid kinds of labour, and one on which women and young girls are by preference employed, is the sorting of rags. It is well known that Great Britain, apart from its own immense store of rags, is the emporium for the rag trade of the whole world. They flow in from Japan, from the most remote States of South America, and from the Canary Islands. But the chief sources of their supply are Germany, France, Russia, Italy, Egypt, Turkey, Belgium, and Hol- land. They are used for manure, for making bedflocks, for shoddy, and they serve as the raw material of paper. The rag-sorters are the medium for the spread of small-pox and other infectious diseases, and they themselves are the first victims.4' A classical example of over- work, of hard and inappropriate labour, and of its brutalising effects

[^1]: 1 And now forsooth children are employed at file-cutting in Sheffield.394

[^2]: 2 "Ch. Empl. Comm., V. Rep. 1866", p. 3, n. 24; p. 6, n. 55, 56; p. 7, n. 59, 60. 3 1. c, pp. 114, 115, n. 6, 7. The commissioner justly remarks that though as a rule machines take the place of men, here literally young persons replace machines.

[^3]: 4 See the Report on the rag trade, and numerous details in "Public Health, VIII. Rep." Lond., 1866, app., pp, 196-208.





**[p. 467]**

"It is impossible for a child to pass through the purgatory of a tile-field without great moral degradation the low language, which they are accustomed to hear from their tenderest years, the filthy, indecent, and shameless habits, amidst which, un- knowing, and half wild, they grow up, make them in after-life lawless, abandoned, dis- solute A frightful source of demoralisation is the mode of living. Each moulder, who is always a skilled labourer, and the chief of a group, supplies his 7 subordinates with board and lodging in his cottage. Whether members of his family or not, the men, boys, and girls all sleep in the cottage, which contains generally two, exceptionally 3 rooms, all on the ground floor, and badly ventilated. These people are so exhausted after the day's hard work, that neither the rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed. Many of these cottages are models of untidiness, dirt, and dust The greatest evil of the system that employs young girls on this sort of work, consists in this that, as a rule, it chains them fast from childhood for the whole of their after-life to the most abandoned rabble. They become rough, foul-mouthed boys, before Nature has taught them that they are women. Clothed in a few dirty rags, the legs naked far above the knees, hair and face besmeared with dirt, they learn to treat all feelings of decency and of shame with contempt. During meal-times they lie at full length in the fields, or watch the boys bathing in a neighbouring canal. Their heavy day's work at length completed, they put on better clothes, and accompany the men to the public houses."

That excessive insobriety is prevalent from childhood upwards among the whole of this class, is only natural.

[^1]: "The worst is that the brickmakers despair of themselves. You might as well, said one of the better kind to a chaplain of Southallfield, try to raise and improve the devil as a brickie, sir!"1'

[^2]: ' "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep., 1866", pp. xvii, xviii, n. 96, 97, and p. 130, n. 39, p. 132, n. 61. See also "III. Rep., 1864", pp. 48, 56.



