---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "d. Modern Domestic Industry "
Page_Range: "480-485"
---

# d. Modern Domestic Industry 



**[p. 468]**

"In my fourth Report (1862) I showed, how it is practically impossible for the work- people to insist upon that which is their first sanitary right, viz., the right that, no mat- ter what the work for which their employer brings them together, the labour, so far as it depends upon him, should be freed from all avoidably unwholesome conditions. I pointed out, that while the workpeople are practically incapable of doing themselves this sanitary justice, they are unable to obtain any effective support from the paid ad- ministrations of the sanitary police The life of myriads of workmen and workwomen is now uselessly tortured and shortened by the never-ending physical suffering that their mere occupation begets."'

In illustration of the way in which the workrooms influence the state of health Dr. Simon gives the following table of mortality.21

d. Modern Domestic Industry

I now come to the so-called domestic industry. In order to get an idea of the horrors of this sphere, in which capital conducts its exploi-

[^1]: Number of persons of all ages employed in the re- spective industries.

[^2]: Industries compared as regards health.

[^3]: Death-rate per 100,000 men in the respective industries between the stated ages. Number of persons of all ages employed in the re- spective industries.

[^4]: Industries compared as regards health.

[^5]: Age 25-35. Age 35-45. Age 45-55.

[^6]: 958,265 22,301 men 1 12,377 women J 13,803

[^7]: Agriculture in En- gland & Wales

[^8]: London tailors

[^9]: London printers

[^10]: 743

[^11]: 958

[^12]: 894

[^13]: 805

[^14]: 1,262

[^15]: 1,747

[^16]: 1,145

[^17]: 2,093

[^18]: 2,367

[^19]: " "Public Health. Sixth Rep.", Lond., 1864, pp. 29, 31. 21 1. c, p. 30. Dr. Simon remarks that the mortality among the London tailors and printers between the ages of 25 and 35 is in fact much greater, because the employers in London obtain from the country a great number of young people up to 30 years of age, as "apprentices" and "improvers", who come for the purpose of being perfected in





**[p. 469]**

Of the 150,000 persons employed in England in the production of lace, about 10,000 fall under the authority of the Factory Act, 1861.396 Almost the whole of the remaining 140,000 are women, young persons, and children of both sexes, the male sex, however, be- ing weakly represented. The state of health of this cheap material for exploitation will be seen from the following table, computed by Dr. Truman, physician to the Nottingham General Dispensary. Out of 686 female patients who were lace-makers, most of them between the ages of 17 and 24, the number of consumptive ones were:

1852. - 1 in 45. 1857.-— 1 in 13. 1853. - 1 in 28. 1858.-— 1 in 15. 1854.-- 1 in 17. 1859. - 1 in 9. 1855.-- 1 in 18. 1860. - 1 in 8. 1856. — 1 in 15. 1861. - 1 in 8.21

This progress in the rate of consumption ought to suffice for the most optimist of progressists, and for the biggest hawker of lies among the Free Trade bagmen of Germany.38

The Factory Act of 1861 regulates the actual making of the lace, so far as it is done by machinery, and this is the rule in England. The branches that we are now about to examine, solely with regard to those of the workpeople who work at home, and not those who work in manufactories or warehouses, fall into two divisions, viz. (1), fin- ishing; (2), mending. The former gives the finishing touches to the machine-made lace, and includes numerous subdivisions.

[^1]: their trade. These figure in the census as Londoners, they swell out the number of heads on which the London death-rate is calculated, without adding proportionally to the number of deaths in that place. The greater part of them in fact return to the coun- try, and especially in cases of severe illness (I.e.).

[^2]: 1 I allude here to hammered nails, as distinguished from nails cut out and made by machinery. See "Child. Empl. Comm, Third Rep.", pp. XI, XIX, n. 125-130, p. 52, n. 14, p. [p. 113-1114, n. 487, p. 137, n. 674.

[^3]: 2 "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep.", p. XXII, n. 166.





**[p. 470]**

The "long stick" is used by the mistresses as a stimulant more and more as the working hours are prolonged.

When women and their children work at home, which nowadays means in a hired room, often in a garret, the state of things is, if possi- ble, still worse. This sort of work is given out within a circle of 80 miles radius from Nottingham. On leaving the warehouses at 9 or 10

[^1]: "It is not at all uncommon in Nottingham to find 15 to 20 children huddled to- gether in a small room, of, perhaps, not more than 12 feet square, and employed for 15 hours out of the 24, at work that of itself is exhausting, from its weariness and mono- tony, and is besides carried on under every possible unwholesome condition Even the very youngest children work with a strained attention and a rapidity that is asto- nishing, hardly ever giving their fingers rest or slowering their motion. If a question be asked them, they never raise their eyes from their work from fear of losing a single mo- ment."

[^2]: "The children gradually tire and become as restless as birds towards the end of their long detention at an occupation that is monotonous, eye-straining, and exhaust- ing from the uniformity in the posture of the body. Their work is like slavery.""

[^3]: 1 "Ch. Empl. Comm. II. Rep., 1864", pp. XIX [No. 141], XX [No. 155], XXI [No. 157].





**[p. 471]**

Pillow lace-making is chiefly carried on in England in two agricul- tural districts; one, the Honiton lace district, extending from 20 to 30 miles along the south coast of Devonshire, and including a few places in North Devon; the other comprising a great part of the counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and Northampton, and also the adjoining portions of Oxfordshire and Huntingdonshire. The cottages of the ag- ricultural labourers are the places where the work is usually carried on. Many manufacturers employ upwards of 3,000 of these lace- makers, who are chiefly children and young persons of the female sex exclusively. The state of things described as incidental to lace finish- ing is here repeated, save that instead of the "mistresses' houses", we find what are called "lace-schools", kept by poor women in their cot- tages. From their fifth year and often earlier, until their twelfth or fif- teenth year, the children work in these schools; during the first year the very young ones work from four to eight hours, and later on, from six in the morning till eight and ten o'clock at night.398

Where lace-making ends in the counties of Buckingham and Bed- ford, straw-plaiting begins, and extends over a large part of Hertford- shire and the westerly and northerly parts of Essex. In 1861, there were 48,043 persons employed in straw-plaiting and straw-hat mak- ing; of these 3,815 were males of all ages, the rest females, of whom 14,913, including about 6,000 children, were under 20 years of age. In the place of the lace-schools we find here the "straw-plait schools".

>: I.e., pp. XXI [No. 163], XXVI [No. 192]. ''• I.e., pp. XXIX, XXX [Nos 214, 217, 220],

[^1]: "The rooms are generally the ordinary living rooms of small cottages, the chimney stopped up to keep out draughts, the inmates kept warm by their own animal heat alone, and this frequently in winter. In other cases, these so-called school-rooms are like small store-rooms without fireplaces The overcrowding in these dens and the consequent vitiation of the air are often extreme. Added to this is the injurious effect of drains, privies, decomposing substances, and other filth usual in the purlieus of the smaller cottages." With regard to space: "In one lace-school 18 girls and a mistress, 33 cubic feet to each person; in another, where the smell was unbearable, 18 persons and 24 — cubic feet per head. In this industry are to be found employed children of 2 and 2— years." 2 3 9 9





**[p. 472]**

"The smaller of these numbers," says one of the commissioners, Mr. White, "rep- resents less space than the half of what a child would occupy if packed in a box measur- ing 3 feet in each direction."

Thus do the children enjoy life till the age of 12 or 14. The wretch- ed half-starved parents think of nothing but getting as much as possible out of their children. The latter, as soon as they are grown up, do not care a farthing, and naturally so, for their parents, and leave them.

And the native land of these model families is the pattern Christian country for Europe; so says at least Count Montalembert, certainly a competent authority on Christianity!

Wages in the above industries, miserable as they are (the maxi- mum wages of a child in the straw-plait schools rising in rare cases to 3 shillings), are reduced far below their nominal amount by the pre- valence of the truck system everywhere, but especially in the lace dis- tricts.21

[^1]: "It is no wonder that ignorance and vice abound in a population so brought up Their morality is at the lowest ebb, a great number of the women have illegitimate children, and that at such an immature age that even those most conversant with cri- minal statistics are astounded."1

[^2]: 1 I.e., pp. XL [No. 305], XLI [No. 306]. 2 "Child. Empl. Comm., I. Rep. 1863", p. 185.



