---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "e. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The Hastening of This Revolution by the Application of the Factory Acts to Those Industries "
Page_Range: "485-495"
---

# e. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry. The Hastening of This Revolution by the Application of the Factory Acts to Those Industries 



**[p. 473]**

e. Passage of Modern Manufacture, and Domestic Industry into Modern Mechanical Industry.

The Hastening of This Revolution by the Application

of the Factory Acts to Those Industries

The cheapening of labour power, by sheer abuse of the labour of women and children, by sheer robbery of every normal condition re- quisite for working and living, and by the sheer brutality of overwork and night-work, meets at last with natural obstacles that cannot be overstepped. So also, when based on these methods, do the cheapen- ing of commodities and capitalist exploitation in general. So soon as this point is at last reached — and it takes many years — the hour has struck for the introduction of machinery, and for the thenceforth rap- id conversion of the scattered domestic industries and also of manu- factures into factory industries.

An example, on the most colossal scale, of this movement is afforded by the production of wearing apparel. This industry, according to the classification of the Children's Employment Commission, comprises straw-hat makers, ladies'-hat makers, cap-makers, tailors, milliners and dressmakers,2 shirt-makers, corset-makers, glove-makers, shoe- makers, besides many minor branches, such as the making of neck- ties, collars, &c. In 1861, the number of females employed in these in- dustries, in England and Wales, amounted to 586,298, of these 115,242 at the least were under 20, and 16,560 under 15 years of age. The number of these workwomen in the United Kingdom in 1861, was 750,334.401 The number of males employed in England and Wales, in hat-making, shoemaking, glove-making and tailoring was 437,969; of these 14,964 under 15 years, 89,285 between 15 and 20, and 333,117 over 20 years. Many of the smaller branches are not in- cluded in these figures. But take the figures as they stand; we then have for England and Wales alone, according to the census of 1861, a total of 1,024,267 persons, about as many as are absorbed by agri- culture and cattle breeding. We begin to understand what becomes of the immense quantities of goods conjured up by the magic of machin- ery, and of the enormous masses of workpeople, which that machinery sets free.

The production of wearing apparel is carried on partly in manu-

[^1]: a The German editions have the following note here: "Millinery, properly speaking, is concerned only with headdress, but usually also involves ladies' coats and mantillas, while dressmakers are identical with what we call modistes."





**[p. 474]**

factories in whose workrooms there is but a reproduction ofthat divi- sion of labour, the membra disjecta 2 7 4 of which were found ready to hand; partly by small master-handicraftsmen; these, however, do not, as formerly, work for individual consumers, but for manufactories and warehouses, and to such an extent that often whole towns and stretches of country carry on certain branches, such as shoemaking, as a speciality; finally, on a very great scale by the so-called domestic workers, who form an external department of the manufactories, warehouses, and even of the workshops of the smaller masters."

The raw material, &c, is supplied by mechanical industry, the mass of cheap human material [taillable à merci et miséricorde*02) is composed of the individuals "liberated" by mechanical industry and improved agriculture. The manufactures of this class owed their ori- gin chiefly to the capitalist's need of having at hand an army ready equipped to meet any increase of demand.2 These manufactures, nevertheless, allowed the scattered handicrafts and domestic indus- tries to continue to exist as a broad foundation. The great production of surplus value in these branches of labour, and the progressive cheap- ening of their articles, were and are chiefly due to the minimum wages paid, no more than requisite for a miserable vegetation, and to the extension of working time up to the maximum endurable by the human organism. It was in fact by the cheapness of the human sweat and the human blood, which were converted into commodities, that the markets were constantly being extended, and continue daily to be extended; more especially was this the case with England's colonial markets, where, besides, English tastes and habits prevail. At last the critical point was reached. The basis of the old method, sheer brutal- ity in the exploitation of the workpeople, accompanied more or less by a systematic division of labour, no longer sufficed for the extending markets and for the still more rapidly extending competition of the capitalists. The hour struck for the advent of machinery. The deci- sively revolutionary machine, the machine which attacks in an equal degree the whole of the numberless branches of this sphere of produc-

[^1]: " In England millinery and dressmaking are for the most part carried on, on the premises of the employer, partly by workwomen who live there, partly by women who live off the premises.

[^2]: 21 Mr. White, a commissioner, visited a military clothing manufactory that em- ployed 1,000 to 1,200 persons, almost all females, and a shoe manufactory with 1,300 persons; of these nearly one half were children and young persons.*03





**[p. 475]**

Its immediate effect on the workpeople is like that of all machinery, which, since the rise of modern industry, has seized upon new branches of trade. Children of too tender an age are sent adrift. The wage of the machine hands rises compared with that of the house- workers, many of whom belong to the poorest of the poor. That of the better situated handicraftsmen, with whom the machine competes, sinks. The new machine hands are exclusively girls and young women. With the help of mechanical force, they destroy the mono- poly that male labour had of the heavier work, and they drive off from the lighter work numbers of old women and very young child- ren. The overpowering competition crushes the weakest of the man- ual labourers. The fearful increase in death from starvation during the last 10 years in London runs parallel with the extension of mach- ine sewing.11 The new workwomen turn the machines by hand and foot, or by hand alone, sometimes sitting, sometimes standing, ac- cording to the weight, size, and special make of the machine, and ex- pend a great deal of labour power. Their occupation is unwholesome, owing to the long hours, although in most cases they are not so long as under the old system.Wherever the sewing-machine locates itself in narrow and already overcrowded workrooms, it adds to the un- wholesome influences.

The revolution in the industrial methods which is the necessary re- sult of the revolution in the instruments of production, is effected by a medley of transition forms. These forms vary according to the ex- tent to which the sewing-machine has become prevalent in one branch of industry or the other, to the time during which it has been in operation, to the previous condition of the workpeople, to the pre- ponderance of manufacture, of handicrafts or of domestic industry, to

[^1]: "The effect," says Mr. Lord, "on entering low-ceiled workrooms in which 30 to 40 machine hands are working is unbearable The heat, partly due to the gas stoves used for warming the irons, is horrible Even when moderate hours of work, i. e., from 8 in the morning till 6 in the evening, prevail in such places, yet 3 or 4 persons fall into a swoon regularly every day."2

[^2]: ,! An instance. The weekly report of deaths by the Registrar-General404 dated 26th Feb., 1864, contains 5 cases of death from starvation. On the same day The Times reports another case. Six victims of starvation in one week!405

[^3]: '• "Child. Empl. Coram, Second Rep., 1864", p. LXVII, n. 406-9, p. 84, n. 124, p. LXXIII, n. 441, p. 68, n. 6, p. 84, n. 126, p. 78, n. 85, p. 76, n. 69, p. LXXII, n. 438.





**[p. 476]**



[^1]: 1 "The rental of premises required for workrooms seems the element which ulti- mately determines the point; and consequently it is in the metropolis, that the old system of giving work out to small employers and families has been longest retained, and earliest returned to" (I.e., p. 83, n. 123). The concluding statement in this quotation refers exclusively to shoemaking.

[^2]: 2 In glove-making and other industries where the condition of the work-people is hardly distinguishable from that of paupers, this does not occur.

[^3]: •' I.e., p. 83, n. 122. * In the wholesale boot and shoe trade of Leicester alone, there were in 1864, 800 sewing-machines already in use.406





**[p. 477]**

This industrial revolution which takes place spontaneously, is artifi- cially helped on by the extension of the Factory Acts to all industries in which women, young persons and children are employed. The com- pulsory regulation of the working day as regards its length, pauses, beginning and end, the system of relays of children, the exclusion of all children under a certain age, &c, necessitate on the one hand more machinery4) and the substitution of steam as a motive power in the

[^1]: " I.e., p. 84, n. 124. 21 Instances: The Army Clothing Depot at Pimlico, London, the Shirt factory of Tillie and Henderson at Londonderry, and the clothes factory of Messrs. Tait at Lime- rick which employs about 1,200 hands.407

[^2]: 31 "Tendency to Factory System" (I.e., p. LXVII). "The whole employment is at this time in a state of transition, and is undergoing the same change as that effected in the lace trade, weaving, &c." (I.e., n. 405). "A complete revolution" (I.e., p. xlvi, n. 318). At the date of the Child. Empl. Comm. of 1842 stocking making was still done by manual labour. Since 1846 various sorts of machines have been introduced, which are now driven by steam. The total number of persons of both sexes and of all ages from 3 years upwards, employed in stocking making in England, was in 1862 about 120,000. Of these only 4,063 were, according to the Parliamentary Return of the 11th February, 1862, working under the Factory Acts.408

[^3]: 41 Thus, e.g., in the earthenware trade, Messrs. Cochrane, of the Britain Pottery,





**[p. 478]**

One of the essential conditions for the existence of the factory sys- tem, especially when the length of the working day is fixed, is cer- tainty in the result, i. e., the production in a given time of a given quantity of commodities, or of a given useful effect. The statutory pauses in the working day, moreover, imply the assumption that per- iodical and sudden cessation of the work does no harm to the article undergoing the process of production. This certainty in the result, and this possibility of interrupting the work are, of course, easier to be attained in the purely mechanical industries than in those in which chemical and physical processes play a part; as, for instance, in the earthenware trade, in bleaching, dyeing, baking, and in most of the metal industries. Wherever there is a working day without restriction as to length, wherever there is night-work and unrestricted waste of human life, there the slightest obstacle presented by the nature of the work to a change for the better is soon looked upon as an everlasting barrier erected by nature. No poison kills vermin with more certainty than the Factory Act removes such everlasting barriers. No one made a greater outcry over "impossibilities" than our friends the earthen- ware manufacturers. In 1864, however, they were brought under the Act, ' 8 ' and within sixteen months every "impossibility" had vanished.

[^1]: Glasgow, report: "To keep up our quantity we have gone extensively into machines wrought by unskilled labour, and every day convinces us that we can produce a great- er quantity than by the old method" ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865", p. 13). "The effect of the Fact. Acts is to force on the further introduction of machinery" (1. c, pp. 13-14).

[^2]: 1; Thus, after the extension of the Factory Act to the potteries, great increase of power-jiggers in place of hand-moved jiggers.409



"The improved method," called forth by the Act, "of making slip by pressure in- stead of by evaporation, the newly-constructed stoves for drying the ware in its green state, &c, are each events of great importance in the pottery art, and mark an advance which the preceding century could not rival. It has even considerably reduced the temperature of the stoves themselves with a considerable saving of fuel, and with a re- adier effect on the ware."l;

In spite of every prophecy, the cost-price of earthenware did not rise, but the quantity produced did, and to such an extent that the ex- port for the twelve months, ending December, 1865, exceeded in value by £138,628 the average of the preceding three years.410 In the manufacture of matches it was thought to be an indispensable requirement, that boys, even while bolting their dinner, should go on dipping the matches in melted phosphorus, the poisonous vapour from which rose into their faces. The Factory Act (1864)41 ' made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping machine, the vapour from which could not come in contact with the workers.2' So, at the present time, in those branches of the lace manufac- ture not yet subject to the Factory Act, it is maintained that the meal- times cannot be regular owing to the different periods required by the various kinds of lace for drying, which periods vary from three min- utes up to an hour and more. To this the Children's Employment Commissioners answer:

Hardly had the Act been passed when our friends the manufac- turers found out:

[^1]: "The circumstances of this case are precisely analogous to that of the paper- stainers, dealt with in our first report. Some of the principal manufacturers in the trade urged that in consequence of the nature of the materials used, and their various proc- esses, they would be unable, without serious loss, to stop for meal-times at any given mo- ment. But it was seen from the evidence that, by due care and previous arrangement, the apprehended difficulty would be got over; and accordingly, by clause 6 of section 6 of the Factory Acts Extension Act, passed during this Session of Parliament, an inter- val of eighteen months is given to them from the passing of the Act before they are re- quired to conform to the meal hours, specified by the Factory Acts."3!

[^2]: "The inconveniences we expected to arise from the introduction of the Factory Acts into our branch of manufacture, I am happy to say, have not arisen. We do not find

[^3]: 11 "Report of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865", pp. 96 and 127. 2 The introduction of this and other machinery into match-making caused in one department alone 230 young persons to be replaced by 32 boys and girls of 14 to 17 years of age. This saving in labour was carried still further in 1865, by the employment of steam power.

[^4]: * "Ch. Empl. Comm., II. Rep., 1864", p. IX, n. 50.





**[p. 480]**

It is evident that the English legislature, which certainly no one will venture to reproach with being overdosed with genius, has been led by experience to the conclusion that a simple compulsory law is sufficient to enact away all the so-called impediments, opposed by the nature of the process, to the restriction and regulation of the working day. Hence, on the introduction of the Factory Act into a given indus- try, a period varying from six to eighteen months is fixed within which it is incumbent on the manufacturers to remove all technical impediments to the working of the Act. Mirabeau's "Impossible! ne me dites jamais ce bête de mot!"4 ' 2 is particularly applicable to mod- em technology. But though the Factory Acts thus artificially ripen the material elements necessary for the conversion of the manufac- turing system into the factory system, yet at the same time, owing to the necessity they impose for greater outlay of capital, they hasten on the decline of the small masters, and the concentration of capital.21

Besides the purely technical impediments that are removable by technical means, the irregular habits of the workpeople themselves obstruct the regulation of the hours of labour. This is especially the case where piece-wage predominates, and where loss of time in one part of the day or week can be made good by subsequent over-time, or by night-work, a process which brutalises the adult workman, and ruins his wife and children.31 Although this absence of regularity in the expenditure of labour power is a natural and rude reaction

[^1]: " "Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865", p. 22. 21 "But it must be borne in mind that those improvements, though carried out fully in some establishments, are by no means general, and are not capable of being brought into use in many of the old manufactories without an expenditure of capital beyond the means of many of the present occupiers." "I cannot but rejoice," writes Sub-Insp. May, "that notwithstanding the temporary disorganisation which inevitably follows the introduction of such a measure (as the Factory Acts Extension Act), and is, indeed, directly indicative of the evils which it was intended to remedy, &c." (Rep. of Insp. of Fact., 31st Oct., 1865 [pp. 96, 97]).

[^2]: 3i With blast furnaces, for instance, "work towards the end of the week being gener- ally much increased in duration in consequence of the habit of the men of idling on Monday and occasionally during a part or the whole of Tuesday also" ("Child. Empl. Comm., III. Rep.," p. VI). "The little masters generally have very irregular hours. They lose two or three days, and then work all night to make it up They always em- ploy their own children, if they have any" (I.e., p. VII). "The want of regularity in coming to work, encouraged by the possibility and practice of making up for this by working longer hours" (I.e., p. XVIII). "In Birmingham an enormous amount of time is lost idling part of the time, slaving the rest" (I.e., p. XI).





**[p. 481]**

"The extension of the railway system throughout the country has tended very much to encourage giving short notice. Purchasers now come up from Glasgow, Man- chester, and Edinburgh once every fortnight or so to the wholesale city warehouses which we supply, and give small orders requiring immediate execution, instead of buy- ing from stock as they used to do. Years ago we were always able to work in the slack times, so as to meet demand of the next season, but now no one can say beforehand what will be the demand then."1'

In those factories and manufactories that are not yet subject to the Factory Acts, the most fearful over-work prevails periodically during what is called the season, in consequence of sudden orders. In the out- side department of the factory, of the manufactory, and of the ware- house, the so-called domestic workers, whose employment is at the best irregular, are entirely dependent for their raw material and their orders on the caprice of the capitalist, who, in this industry, is not hampered by any regard for depreciation of his buildings and machin- ery, and risks nothing by a stoppage of work, but the skin of the worker himself. Here then he sets himself systematically to work to form an industrial reserve force that shall be ready at a moment's no- tice; during one part of the year he decimates this force by the most inhuman toil, during the other part, he lets it starve for want of work.

[^1]: "The employers avail themselves of the habitual irregularity in the homework, when any extra work is wanted at a push, so that the work goes on till 11, and 12 p. m. or 2 a. m., or as the usual phrase is, 'all hours'," and that in localities where "the stench is enough to knock you down, you go to the door, perhaps, and open it, but shudder to go further".'1 "They are curious men," said one of the witnesses, a shoemaker, speaking of

[^2]: " "Child. Empl. Comm., IV. Rep.", p. xxxii, "The extension of the railway system is said to have contributed greatly to this custom of giving sudden orders, and the consequent hurry, neglect of meal-times, and late hours of the workpeople" (I.e., p. xxxi).

[^3]: 2> "Ch. Empl. Comm., III. Rep.", p. xxxv, n. 235, 237.





**[p. 482]**

In the same way as technical impediments, so, too, those "usages which have grown with the growth of trade" were and still are pro- claimed by interested capitalists as obstacles due to the nature of the work. This was a favourite cry of the cotton lords at the time they were first threatened with the Factory Acts.'68 Although their indus- try more than any other depends on navigation, yet experience has given them the lie. Since then, every pretended obstruction to busi- ness has been treated by the Factory inspectors as a mere sham.2' The thoroughly conscientious investigations of the Children's Employ- ment Commission prove that the effect of the regulation of the hours of work, in some industries, was to spread the mass of labour pre- viously employed more evenly over the whole year31; that this regula- tion was the first rational bridle on the murderous, meaningless capri- ces of fashion,4' caprices that consort so badly with the system of mod- ern industry; that the development of ocean navigation and of the means of communication generally, has swept away the technical basis on which season-work was really supported,5' and that all other so-called unconquerable difficulties vanish before larger buildings, additional machinery, increase in the number of workpeople em- ployed,6' and the alterations caused by all these in the mode of con-

[^1]: 1 "Ch. Empl. Coram, IV. Rep.", p. 127, n. 56. 2 "With respect to the loss of trade by non-completion of shipping orders in time, I remember that this was the pet argument of the factory masters in 1832 and 1833. Nothing that can be advanced now on this subject, could have the force that it had then, before steam had halved all distances and established new regulations for transit. It quite failed at that time of proof when put to the test, and again it will certainly fail should it have to be tried" ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., 31 Oct., 1862", pp. 54, 55).

[^2]: 3 "Ch. Empl. Comm. III. Rep.", p. XVIII, n. 118. ,; John Bellers remarked as far back as 1699: "The uncertainty of fashions does in- crease necessitous poor. It has two great mischiefs in it. 1st, The journeymen are miser- able in winter for want of work, the mercers and master-weavers not daring to lay out their stocks to keep the journeymen employed before the spring comes, and they know what the fashion will then be; 2ndly, In the spring the journeymen are not sufficient, but the master-weavers must draw in many prentices, that they may supply the trade of the kingdom in a quarter or half a year, which robs the plough of hands, drains the country of labourers, and in a great part stocks the city with beggars, and starves some in winter that are ashamed to beg" {Essays about the Poor, Manufactures, &.c, p. 9).

[^3]: '' "Ch. Empl. Comm. V. Rep.", p. 171, n. 34. 6 The evidence of some Bradford export-houses is as follows: "Under these circum- stances, it seems clear that no boys need be worked longer than from 8 a. m. to 7 or 7.30



