---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "I. Length of the Working Day and Intensity of Labour Constant Productiveness of Labour Variable "
Page_Range: "532-536"
---

# I. Length of the Working Day and Intensity of Labour Constant Productiveness of Labour Variable 



**[p. 520]**

I. LENGTH OF THE WORKING DAY AND INTENSITY

OF LABOUR CONSTANT. PRODUCTIVENESS OF LABOUR VARIABLE

On these assumptions the value of labour power, and the magni- tude of surplus value, are determined by three laws.

( 1. ) A working day of given length always creates the same amount of value, no matter how the productiveness of labour, and, with it, the mass of the product, and the price of each single commodity pro- duced, may vary.

If the value created by a working day of 12 hours be, say, six shil- lings, then, although the mass of the articles produced varies with the productiveness of labour, the only result is that the value represented by six shillings is spread over a greater or less number of articles.

(2.) Surplus value and the value of labour power vary in opposite directions. A variation in the productiveness of labour, its increase or diminution, causes a variation in the opposite direction in the value of labour power, and in the same direction in surplus value.

The value created by a working day of 12 hours is a constant quan- tity, say, six shillings. This constant quantity is the sum of the surplus value plus the value of the labour power, which latter value the la- bourer replaces by an equivalent. It is self-evident, that if a constant quantity consists of two parts, neither of them can increase without the other diminishing. Let the two parts at starting be equal; 3 shil-



**[p. 521]**

Further, the value of labour power cannot fall, and consequently surplus value cannot rise, without a rise in the productiveness of la- bour. For instance, in the above case, the value of the labour power cannot sink from three shillings to two, unless an increase in the pro- ductiveness of labour makes it possible to produce in 4 hours the same quantity of necessaries as previously required 6 hours to produce. On the other hand, the value of the labour power cannot rise from three shillings to four, without a decrease in the productiveness of labour, whereby eight hours become requisite to produce the same quantity of necessaries, for the production of which six hours previously suf- ficed. It follows from this, that an increase in the productiveness of labour causes a fall in the value of labour power and a consequent rise in surplus value, while, on the other hand, a decrease in such produc- tiveness causes a rise in the value of labour power, and a fall in sur- plus value.

In formulating this law,440 Ricardo overlooked one circumstance; although a change in the magnitude of the surplus value or surplus labour causes a change in the opposite direction in the magnitude of the value of labour power, or in the quantity of necessary labour, it by no means follows that they vary in the same proportion. They do increase or diminish by the same quantity. But their proportional in- crease or diminution depends on their original magnitudes before the change in the productiveness of labour took place. If the value of the labour power be 4 shillings, or the necessary labour time 8 hours, and the surplus value be 2 shillings, or the surplus labour 4 hours, and if, in consequence of an increase in the productiveness of labour, the value of the labour power fall to 3 shillings, or the necessary labour to 6 hours, the surplus value will rise to 3 shillings, or the surplus labour to 6 hours. The same quantity, 1 shilling or 2 hours, is added in one case and subtracted in the other. But the proportional change of mag-



**[p. 522]**

(3.) Increase or diminution in surplus value is always consequent on, and never the cause of, the corresponding diminution or increase in the value of labour power.''

Since the working day is constant in magnitude, and is represented by a value of constant magnitude, since, to every variation in the magnitude of surplus value, there corresponds an inverse variation in the value of labour power, and since the value of labour power can- not change, except in consequence of a change in the productiveness of labour, it clearly follows, under these conditions, that every change of magnitude in surplus value arises from an inverse change of magni- tude in the value of labour power. If, then, as we have already seen, there can be no change of absolute magnitude in the value of labour power, and in surplus value, unaccompanied by a change in their re- lative magnitudes, so now it follows that no change in their relative magnitudes is possible, without a previous change in the absolute magnitude of the value of labour power.

According to the third law, a change in the magnitude of surplus value, presupposes a movement in the value of labour power, which movement is brought about by a variation in the productiveness of la- bour. The limit of this change is given by the altered value of labour power. Nevertheless, even when circumstances allow the law to oper- ate, subsidiary movements may occur. For example: if in consequence

[^1]: 11 To this third law Mac Culloch has made, amongst others, this absurd addition, that a rise in surplus value, unaccompanied by a fall in the value oflabour power, can occur through the abolition of taxes payable by the capitalist. The abolition of such taxes makes no change whatever in the quantity of surplus value that the capitalist ex- torts at first-hand from the labourer. It alters only the proportion in which that surplus value is divided between himself and third persons. It consequently makes no altera- tion whatever in the relation between surplus value and value oflabour power. Mac- Culloch's exception therefore proves only his misapprehension of the rule, a misfortune that as often happens to him in the vulgarisation of Ricardo, as it does to J. B. Say in the vulgarisation of Adam Smith.441





**[p. 523]**

The value of labour power is determined by the value of a given quantity of necessaries. It is the value and not the mass of these neces- saries that varies with the productiveness of labour. It is, however, possible that, owing to an increase of productiveness, both the la- bourer and the capitalist may simultaneously be able to appropriate a greater quantity of these necessaries, without any change in the price of labour power or in surplus value. If the value of labour power be 3 shillings, and the necessary labour time amount to 6 hours, if the surplus value, likewise be 3 shillings, and the surplus labour 6 hours, then if the productiveness of labour were doubled without altering the ratio of necessary labour to surplus labour, there would be no change of magnitude in surplus value and price of labour power. The only result would be that each of them would represent twice as many use values as before; these use values being twice as cheap as before. Although labour power would be unchanged in price, it would be above its value. If, however, the price of labour power had fallen, not to Is. 6d., the lowest possible point consistent with its new value, but to 2s. l Od. or 2s. 6d., still this lower price would represent an increased mass of necessaries. In this way it is possible with an increasing pro- ductiveness of labour, for the price of labour power to keep on falling, and yet this fall to be accompanied by a constant growth in the mass of the labourer's means of subsistence. But even in such case, the fall in the value of labour power would cause a corresponding rise of surplus value, and thus the abyss between the labourer's position and that of the capitalist would keep widening.1'.

Ricardo was the first who accurately formulated the three laws we have above stated. But he falls into the following errors: (1) he looks

[^1]: 1 "When an alteration takes place in the productiveness of industry, and that ei- ther more or less is produced by a given quantity of labour and capital, the proportion of wages may obviously vary, whilst the quantity, which that proportion represents, re- mains the same, or the quantity may vary, whilst the proportion remains the same" ([J. Casenove J Outlines of Political Economy, &c, p. 67).



