---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "III. Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length of the Working Day Variable "
Page_Range: "538-539"
---

# III. Productiveness and Intensity of Labour Constant. Length of the Working Day Variable 



**[p. 526]**

The working day may vary in two ways. It may be made either longer or shorter.442 From our present data, and within the limits of the assumptions made on p. 487 we obtain the following laws:

(1.) The working day creates a greater or less amount of value in proportion to its length — thus, a variable and not a constant quan- tity of value.

(2.) Every change in the relation between the magnitudes of sur- plus value and of the value of labour power arises from a change in the absolute magnitude of the surplus labour, and consequently of the surplusvalue.

(3.) The absolute value of labour power can change only in con- sequence of the reaction exercised by the prolongation of surplus labour upon the wear and tear of labour power. Every change in this absolute value is therefore the effect, but never the cause, of a change in the magnitude of surplus value.

We begin with the case in which the working day is shortened.

(1.) A shortening of the working day under the conditions given above, leaves the value of labour power, and with it, the necessary labour time, unaltered. It reduces the surplus labour and surplus value. Along with the absolute magnitude of the latter, its relative magnitude also falls, i. e., its magnitude relatively to the value of labour power whose magnitude remains unaltered. Only by lowering the price of labour power below its value could the capitalist save himself harmless.

All the usual arguments against the shortening of the working day, assume that it takes place under the conditions we have here sup- posed to exist; but in reality the very contrary is the case: a change in the productiveness and intensity of labour either precedes, or imme- diately follows, a shortening of the working day."

(2.) Lengthening of the working day. Let the necessary labour time be 6 hours, or the value of labour power 3 shillings; also let the sur- plus labour be 6 hours or the surplus value 3 shillings. The whole working day then amounts to 12 hours and is embodied in a value of

[^1]: nental working hour would be a law shortening quantitatively the length of the work- ing day in Continental factories.

[^2]: 1 "There are compensating circumstances which the working of the Ten Hours' Act has brought to light" ("Rep. of Insp. of Fact, for 31st Oct. 1848", p. 7).443



