---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "( 1.) Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simultaneous Lengthening of the Working Day "
Page_Range: "540-542"
---

# ( 1.) Diminishing Productiveness of Labour with a Simultaneous Lengthening of the Working Day 



**[p. 528]**

(1.) Diminishing productiveness of labour with a simultaneous lengthening of the working day

In speaking of diminishing productiveness of labour, we here refer to diminution in those industries whose products determine the value of labour power, such a diminution, for example, as results from de- creasing fertility of the soil, and from the corresponding dearness of its products. Take the working day at 12 hours and the value created by it at 6 shillings, of which one half replaces the value of the labour pow- er, the other forms the surplus value. Suppose, in consequence of the increased dearness of the products of the soil, that the value of labour power rises from 3 shillings to 4, and therefore the necessary labour time from 6 hours to 8. If there be no change in the length of the working day, the surplus labour would fall from 6 hours to 4, the surplus value from 3 shillings to 2. If the day be lengthened by 2 hours, i. e., from 12 hours to 14, the surplus labour remains at 6 hours, the surplus value at 3 shillings, but the surplus value decreases compared with the value of labour power, as measured by the necessary labour time. If the day be lengthened by 4 hours, viz., from 12 hours to 16, the proportional magnitudes of surplus value and value of labour po- wer, of surplus labour and necessary labour, continue unchanged, but the absolute magnitude of surplus value rises from 3 shillings to 4, that of the surplus labour from 6 hours to 8, an increment of 33-j%- Therefore, with diminishing productiveness of labour and a simultaneous lengthening of the working day, the absolute magnitude of surplus value may continue unaltered, at the same time that its relative magnitude diminishes; its relative magnitude may continue unchanged, at the same time that its absolute magnitude increases; and, provided the lengthening of the day be sufficient, both may increase.



**[p. 529]**

" "Corn and labour rarely march quite abreast; but there is an obvious limit, beyond which they cannot be separated. With regard to the unusual exertions made by the labouring classes in periods of dearness, which produce the fall of wages noticed in the evidence" (namely, before the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry, 1814-15), "they are most meritorious in the individuals, and certainly favour the growth of capi- tal. But no man of humanity could wish to see them constant and unremitted. They are most admirable as a temporary relief; but if they were constantly in action, effects of a similar kind would result from them, as from the population of a country being pushed to the very extreme limits of its food" (Malthus, Inquiry into the Mature and Prog- ress of Rent, Lond., 1815, p. 48, note). All honour to Malthus that he lays stress on the lengthening of the hours of labour, a fact to which he elsewhere in his pamphlet draws attention, while Ricardo and others, in face of the most notorious facts, make invaria- bility in the length of the working day the groundwork of all their investigations. But the conservative interests, which Malthus served, prevented him from seeing that an unlimited prolongation of the working day, combined with an extraordinary develop- ment of machinery, and the exploitation of women and children, must inevitably have made a great portion of the working-class "supernumerary", particularly whenever the war should have ceased, and the monopoly of England in the markets of the world should have come to an end. It was, of course, far more convenient, and much more in conformity with the interests of the ruling classes, whom Malthus adored like a true priest, to explain this "overpopulation" by the eternal laws of Nature, rather than by the historical laws of capitalist production.*45

[^1]: 2) "A principal cause of the increase of capital, during the war, proceeded from the greater exertions, and perhaps the greater privations of the labouring classes, the most numerous in every society. More women and children were compelled by necessitous circumstances, to enter upon laborious occupations, and former workmen were, from the same cause, obliged to devote a greater portion of their time to increase produc- tion" ([G. Robertson,] Essays on Pol. Econ., in which are Illustrated the Principal Causes of the Present National Distress. Lond., 1830, p. 248).



