---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "( 2.) Increasing Intensity and Productiveness of Labour with Simultaneous Shortening of the Working Day "
Page_Range: "542-543"
---

# ( 2.) Increasing Intensity and Productiveness of Labour with Simultaneous Shortening of the Working Day 



**[p. 530]**

Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour, both have a like effect. They both augment the mass of articles produced in a given time. Both, therefore, shorten that portion of the working day which the labourer needs to produce his means of subsistence or their equivalent. The minimum length of the working day is fixed by this necessary but contractile portion of it. If the whole working day were to shrink to the length of this portion, surplus labour would vanish, a consummation utterly impossible under the régime of capital. Only by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the length of the working day be reduced to the necessary labour time. But, even in that case, the latter would extend its limits. On the one hand, because the notion of "means of subsistence" would considerably expand, and the labourer would lay claim to an altogether different standard of life. On the other hand, because a part of what is now surplus labour, would then count as necessary labour; I mean the labour of forming a fund for reserve and accumulation.

The more the productiveness of labour increases, the more can the working day be shortened; and the more the working day is short- ened, the more can the intensity of labour increase. From a social point of view, the productiveness increases in the same ratio as the economy of labour, which, in its turn, includes not only economy of the means of production, but also the avoidance of all useless labour. The capi- talist mode of production, while on the one hand, enforcing economy in each individual business, on the other hand, begets, by its anarchi- cal system of competition, the most outrageous squandering of labour power and of the social means of production, not to mention the crea- tion of a vast number of employments, at present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous.

The intensity and productiveness of labour being given, the time which society is bound to devote to material production is shorter, and as a consequence, the time at its disposal for the free develop- ment, intellectual and social, of the individual is greater, in propor- tion as the work is more and more evenly divided among all the able- bodied members of society, and as a particular class is more and more deprived of the power to shift the natural burden of labour from its own shoulders to those of another layer of society. In this direction, the shortening of the working day finds at last a limit in the generali-

