---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "Section 3.- Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus Population or Industrial Reserve Army "
Page_Range: "635-646"
---

# Section 3.- Progressive Production of a Relative Surplus Population or Industrial Reserve Army 



**[p. 623]**

SECTION 3.— PROGRESSIVE PRODUCTION

OF A RELATIVE SURPLUS POPULATION

OR INDUSTRIAL RESERVE ARMY

The accumulation of capital, though originally appearing as its quantitative extension only, is effected, as we have seen, under a progressive qualitative change in its composition, under a constant increase of its constant, at the expense of its variable constituent.1'

The specifically capitalist mode of production, the development of the productive power of labour corresponding to it, and the change thence resulting in the organic composition of capital, do not merely keep pace with the advance of accumulation, or with the growth of social wealth. They develop at a much quicker rate, because mere ac- cumulation, the absolute increase of the total social capital, is accom- panied by the centralisation of the individual capitals of which that total is made up; and because the change in the technological compo- sition of the additional capital goes hand in hand with a similar change in the technological composition of the original capital. With the advance of accumulation, therefore, the proportion of constant to variable capital changes. If it was originally say 1:1, it now becomes successively 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, 5:1, 7:1, &c, so that, as the cap- ital increases, instead of \ of its total value, only \ , -\, 5 , -£ , -£• , &c, is transformed into labour power, and, on the other hand, | , "4 » t > "6 j ~8 j m t o means of production. Since the demand for labour is determined not by the amount of capital as a whole, but by its variable constituent alone, that demand falls progressively with the increase of the total capital, instead of, as previously assumed, ris- ing in proportion to it. It falls relatively to the magnitude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as this magnitude increases. With the growth of the total capital, its variable constituent or the labour incorporated in it, also does increase, but in a constantly dimin-

[^1]: 11 Note in the 3rd German edition.— In Marx's copy there is here the marginal note: "Here note for working out later; if the extension is only quantitative, then for a great- er and a smaller capital in the same branch of business the profits are as the magni- tudes of the capitals advanced. If the quantitative extension induces qualitative change, then the rate of profit on the larger capital rises simultaneously."





**[p. 624]**

Considering the social capital in its totality, the movement of its accumulation now causes periodical changes, affecting it more or less as a whole, now distributes its various phases simultaneously over the different spheres of production. In some spheres a change in the com- position of capital occurs without increase of its absolute magnitude, as a consequence of simple centralisationa; in others the absolute growth of capital is connected with absolute diminution of its vari- able constituent, or of the labour power absorbed by it; in others again, capital continues growing for a time on its given technical basis, and attracts additional labour power in proportion to its in- crease, while at other times it undergoes organic change, and lessens its variable constituent; in all spheres, the increase of the variable part of capital, and therefore of the number of labourers employed by it, is always connected with violent fluctuations and transitory production of surplus population, whether this takes the more striking form of the repulsion of labourers already employed or the less evident but not less real form of the more difficult absorption of the additional labour-

[^1]: a In the German editions "concentration".





**[p. 625]**

11 The census of England and Wales shows: all persons employed in agriculture (landlords, farmers, gardeners, shepherds, &c, included): 1851, 2,011,447; 1861, 1,924,110. Fall, 87,337. Worsted manufacture: 1851, 102,714 persons; 1861, 79,242. Silk weaving: 1851, 111,940; 1861, 101,678. Calico-printing: 1851, 12,098; 1861, 12,556. A small rise that, in the face of the enormous extension of this industry and im- plying a great fall proportionally in the number of labourers employed. Hat-making: 1851, 15,957; 1861, 13,814. Straw-hat and bonnet-making: 1851, 20,393; 1861, 18,176. Malting: 1851, 10,566; 1861, 10,677. Chandlery, 1851, 4,949; 1861, 4,686. This fall is due, besides other causes, to the increase in lighting by gas. Comb-making: 1851, 2,038; 1861, 1,478. Sawyers: 1851, 30,552; 1861, 31,647 —a small rise in consequence of the increase of sawing-machines. Nail-making: 1851, 26,940; 1861, 26,130 — fall in consequence of the competition of machinery. Tin and copper-mining: 1851, 31,360; 1861, 32,041. On the other hand: Cotton-spinning and weaving: 1851, 371,777; 1861, 456,646. Coal-mining: 1851, 183,389; 1861, 246,613 [Census, pp. 35, 37, 39]. "The increase of labourers is generally greatest, since 1851, in such branches of industry in which machinery has not up to the present been employed with success" (Census of Eng- land and Wales for 1861, Vol. Ill, London, 1863, p. 36).

[^1]: 21 jl Added in the 4th German edition.— The law of progressive diminution of the rela- tive magnitude of variable capital and its effect on the condition of the class of wage workers is conjectured rather than understood by some of the prominent economists of the classical school. The greatest service was rendered here by John Barton, although he, like all the rest, lumps together constant and fixed capital, variable and circulating capital. He says: // "The demand for labour depends on the increase of circulating, and not of fixed capital. Were it true that the proportion between these two sorts of capital is the same at all times, and in all circumstances, then, indeed, it follows that the num- ber of labourers employed is in proportion to the wealth of the state. But such a propo- sition has not the semblance of probability. As arts are cultivated, and civilisation is ex- tended, fixed capital bears a larger and larger proportion to circulating capital. The amount of fixed capital employed in the production of a piece of British muslin is at least a hundred, probably a thousand times greater than that employed in a similar piece of Indian muslin. And the proportion of circulating capital is a hundred or thou-





**[p. 626]**

But if a surplus labouring population is a necessary product of ac- cumulation or of the development of wealth on a capitalist basis, this surplus population becomes, conversely, the lever of capitalistic accu- mulation, nay, a condition of existence of the capitalist mode of pro- duction. It forms a disposable industrial reserve army, that belongs to capital quite as absolutely as if the latter had bred it at its own cost. Independently of the limits of the actual increase of population, it creates, for the changing needs of the self-expansion of capital, a mass of human material always ready for exploitation. With accumula- tion, and the development of the productiveness of labour that ac- companies it, the power of sudden expansion of capital grows also; it grows, not merely because the elasticity of the capital already func- tioning increases, not merely because the absolute wealth of society expands, of which capital only forms an elastic part, not merely be- cause credit, under every special stimulus, at once places an unusual part of this wealth at the disposal of production in the form of addi- tional capital; it grows, also, because the technical conditions of the process of production themselves — machinery, means of transport, &c.— now admit of the rapidest transformation of masses of surplus product into additional means of production. The mass of social wealth, overflowing with the advance of accumulation, and trans- formable into additional capital, thrusts itself frantically into old

[^1]: sand times less the whole of the annual savings, added to the fixed capital, would have no effect in increasing the demand for labour" (John Barton, Observations on the Circumstances which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes of Society, London, 1817, pp. 16, 17). "The same cause which may increase the net revenue of the country may at the same time render the population redundant, and deteriorate the condition of the labourer" (Ricardo, I.e., p. 469). With increase of capital, "the demand //for labour// will be in a diminishing ratio" (ibid., p. 480, note). "The amount of capital devoted to the maintenance of labour may vary, independently of any changes in the whole amount of capital Great fluctuations in the amount of employment, and great suffering may become more frequent as capital itself becomes more plentiful" (Richard Jones, An Introductory Lecture on Pol. Econ., Lond., 1833, p. 52). "Demand //for labour// will rise not in proportion to the accumulation of the general capital Every augmentation, therefore, in the national stock destined for reproduction, comes, in the progress of society, to have less and less influence upon the condition of the labourer" (Ramsay, I.e., pp. 90, 91).





**[p. 627]**

branches of production, whose market suddenly expands, or into new- ly formed branches, such as railways, &c, the need for which grows out of the development of the old ones. In all such cases, there must be the possibility of throwing great masses of men suddenly on the de- cisive points without injury to the scale of production in other spheres. Overpopulation supplies these masses. The course characteristic of modern industry, viz., a decennial cycle (interrupted by smaller os- cillations), of periods of average activity, production at high pressure, crisis and stagnation, depends on the constant formation, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the industrial reserve army or surplus population. In their turn, the varying phases of the in- dustrial cycle recruit the surplus population, and become one of the most energetic agents of its reproduction. This peculiar course of mod- ern industry, which occurs in no earlier period of human history, was also impossible in the childhood of capitalist production. The composition of capital changed but very slowly. With its accumula- tion, therefore, there kept pace, on the whole, a corresponding growth in the demand for labour. Slow as was the advance of accu- mulation compared with that of more modern times, it found a check in the natural limits of the exploitable labouring population, limits which could only be got rid of by forcible means to be mentioned later. The expansion by fits and starts of the scale of production is the preliminary to its equally sudden contraction; the latter again evokes the former, but the former is impossible without disposable human material, without an increase in the number of labourers independently of the absolute growth of the population. This increase is effected by the simple process that constantly "sets free" a part of the labourers; by methods which lessen the number of labourers employed in proportion to the increased production. The whole form of the movement of modern industry depends, therefore, upon the con- stant transformation of a part of the labouring population into unemployed or half-employed hands. The superficiality of political economy shows itself in the fact that it looks upon the expansion and contraction of credit, which is a mere symptom of the periodic changes of the industrial cycle, as their cause. As the heavenly bodies, once thrown into a certain definite motion, always repeat this, so is it with social production as soon as it is once thrown into this movement of alternate expansion and contraction. Effects, in their turn, become causes, and the varying accidents of the whole process, which always reproduces its own conditions, take on the form of periodicity. When



**[p. 628]**

"Suppose," says H. Merivale, formerly professor of political economy at Oxford, subsequently employed in the English Colonial Office, "suppose that, on the occasion of some of these crises, the nation were to rouse itself to the effort of getting rid by emi- gration of some hundreds of thousands of superfluous arms, what would be the conse- quence? That, at the first returning demand for labour, there would be a deficiency. However rapid reproduction may be, it takes, at all events, the space of a generation to replace the loss of adult labour. Now, the profits of our manufacturers depend mainly on the power of making use of the prosperous moment when demand is brisk, and thus compensating themselves for the interval during which it is slack. This power is secured to them only by the command of machinery and of manual labour. They must have hands ready by them, they must be able to increase the activity of their operations when required, and to slacken it again, according to the state of the market, or they cannot possibly maintain that pre-eminence in the race of competition on which the wealth of the country is founded."1

Even Malthus recognises overpopulation as a necessity of modern industry, though, after his narrow fashion, he explains it by the abso- lute overgrowth of the labouring population, not by their becoming relatively supernumerary. He says:

After political economy has thus demonstrated the constant pro- duction of a relative surplus population of labourers to be a necessity of capitalistic accumulation, she very aptly, in the guise of an old maid, puts in the mouth of her "beau ideal" of a capitalist the follow- ing words addressed to those supernumeraries thrown on the streets by their own creation of additional capital: —

[^1]: "Prudential habits with regard to marriage, carried to a considerable extent among the labouring class of a country mainly depending upon manufactures and commerce, might injure it From the nature of a population, an increase of labourers cannot be brought into market in consequence of a particular demand till after the lapse of 16 or 18 years, and the conversion of revenue into capital, by saving, may take place much more rapidly; a country is always liable to an increase in the quantity of the funds for the maintenance of labour faster than the increase of population."2

[^2]: ') H. Merivale, Lectures on Colonisation and Colonies, 1841, Vol. I, p. 146. 2i Malthus, Principles of Political Economy, pp. 215, 319, 320. In this work, Mal- thus finally discovers, with the help of Sismondi, the beautiful Trinity of capitalistic production: overproduction, overpopulation, overconsumption — three very delicate monsters, indeed. Cf. F. Engels, Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie, 1. c, p. 107, et seq. [present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 435-40].





**[p. 629]**

"We manufacturers do what we can for you, whilst we are increasing that capital on which you must subsist, and you must do the rest by accommodating your numbers to the means of subsistence.",!

Capitalist production can by no means content itself with the quantity of disposable labour power which the natural increase of population yields. It requires for its free play an industrial reserve army independent of these natural limits.

Up to this point it has been assumed that the increase or diminu- tion of the variable capital corresponds rigidly with the increase or diminution of the number of labourers employed.

The number of labourers commanded by capital may remain the same, or even fall, while the variable capital increases. This is the case if the individual labourer yields more labour, and therefore his wages increase, and this although the price of labour remains the same or even falls, only more slowly than the mass of labour rises. Increase of variable capital, in this case, becomes an index of more labour, but not of more labourers employed. It is the absolute interest of every capitalist to press a given quantity of labour out of a smaller, rather than a greater number of labourers, if the cost is about the same. In the latter case, the outlay of constant capital increases in proportion to the mass of labour set in action; in the former that increase is much smaller. The more extended the scale of production, the stronger this motive. Its force increases with the accumulation of capital.

We have seen that the development of the capitalist mode of pro- duction and of the productive power of labour — at once the cause and effect of accumulation — enables the capitalist, with the same outlay of variable capital, to set in action more labour by greater ex- ploitation (extensive or intensive) of each individual labour power. We have further seen that the capitalist buys with the same capital a greater mass of labour power, as he progressively replaces skilled la- bourers by less skilled, mature labour power by immature, male by female, that of adults by that of young persons or children.

On the one hand, therefore, with the progress of accumulation, a larger variable capital sets more labour in action without enlisting more labourers; on the other, a variable capital of the same magni- tude sets in action more labour with the same mass of labour power; and, finally, a greater number of inferior labour powers by displace- ment of higher.

[^1]: " Harriet Martineau, A Manchester Strike, 1832, p. 101.





**[p. 630]**

The production of a relative surplus population, or the setting free of labourers, goes on therefore yet more rapidly than the technical revolution of the process of production that accompanies, and is acce- lerated by, the advance of accumulation, and more rapidly than the corresponding diminution of the variable part of capital as compared with the constant. If the means of production, as they increase in ex- tent and effective power, become to a less extent means of employ- ment of labourers, this state of things is again modified by the fact that in proportion as the productiveness of labour increases, capital increases its supply of labour more quickly than its demand for labour- ers. The overwork of the employed part of the working class swells the ranks of the reserve, whilst conversely the greater pressure that the latter by its competition exerts on the former, forces these to sub- mit to overwork and to subjugation under the dictates of capital. The condemnation of one part of the working class to enforced idleness by the overwork of the other part, and the converse, becomes a means of enriching the individual capitalists,l; and accelerates at the same time the production of the industrial reserve army on a scale correspond- ing with the advance of social accumulation. How important is this element in the formation of the relative surplus population, is shown

[^1]: 11 Even in the cotton famine of 1863 we find, in a pamphlet of the operative cotton- spinners of Blackburn, fierce denunciations of overwork, which, in consequence of the Factory Acts, of course only affected adult male labourers. "The adult operatives at this mill have been asked to work from 12 to 13 hours per day, while there are hund- reds who are compelled to be idle who would willingly work partial time, in order to maintain their families and save their brethren from a premature grave through being overworked We," it goes on to say, "would ask if the practice of working overtime by a number of hands, is likely to create a good feeling between masters and servants. Those who are worked overtime feel the injustice equally with those who are con- demned to forced idleness. There is in the district almost sufficient work to give to all partial employment if fairly distributed. We are only asking what is right in requesting the masters generally to pursue a system of short hours, particularly until a better state of things begins to dawn upon us, rather than to work a portion of the hands overtime, while others, for want of work, are compelled to exist upon charity" ("Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 31, 1863", p. 8). The author [Cunningham, J.] of the Essay on Trade and Commerce grasps the effect of a relative surplus population on the employed labourers with his usual unerring bourgeois instinct. "Another cause of idleness in this kingdom is the want of a sufficient number of labouring hands Whenever from an extraordinary demand for manufactures, labour grows scarce, the labourers feel their own consequ- ence, and will make their masters feel it likewise — it is amazing; but so depraved are the dispositions of these people, that in such cases a set of workmen have combined to distress the employer by idling a whole day together" [Essay, &c, pp. 27, 28). The fellows in fact were hankering after a rise in wages.





**[p. 631]**

by the example of England. Her technical means for saving labour are colossal. Nevertheless, if tomorrow morning labour generally were reduced to a rational amount, and proportioned to the different sections of the working class according to age and sex, the working population to hand would be absolutely insufficient for the carrying on of national production on its present scale. The great majority of the labourers now "unproductive" would have to be turned into "productive" ones.

Taking them as a whole, the general movements of wages are ex- clusively regulated by the expansion and contraction of the industrial reserve army, and these again correspond to the periodic changes of the industrial cycle. They are, therefore, not determined by the varia- tions of the absolute number of the working population, but by the varying proportions in which the working class is divided into active and reserve army, by the increase or diminution in the relative amount of the surplus population, by the extent to which it is now ab- sorbed, now set free. For modern industry with its decennial cycles and periodic phases, which, moreover, as accumulation advances, are complicated by irregular oscillations following each other more and more quickly, that would indeed be a beautiful law, which pretends to make the action of capital dependent on the absolute variation of the population, instead of regulating the demand and supply of la- bour by the alternate expansion and contraction of capital, the la- bour market now appearing relatively underfull, because capital is expanding, now again overfull, because it is contracting. Yet this is the dogma of the economists. According to them, wages rise in conse- quence of accumulation of capital. The higher wages stimulate the working population to more rapid multiplication, and this goes on until the labour market becomes too full, and therefore capital, rela- tively to the supply of labour, becomes insufficient. Wages fall, and now we have the reverse of the medal. The working population is lit- tle by little decimated as the result of the fall in wages, so that capital is again in excess relatively to them, or, as others explain it, falling wages and the corresponding increase in the exploitation of the la- bourer again accelerates accumulation, whilst, at the same time, the lower wages hold the increase of the working class in check. Then comes again the time, when the supply of labour is less than the de- mand, wages rise, and so on. A beautiful mode of motion this for de- veloped capitalist production! Before, in consequence of the rise of wages, any positive increase of the population really fit for work could



**[p. 632]**

Between 1849 and 1859, a rise of wages practically insignificant, though accompanied by falling prices of corn, took place in the Eng- lish agricultural districts. In Wiltshire, e.g., the weekly wages rose from 7s. to 8s.; in Dorsetshire from 7s. or 8s., to 9s., &c. This was the result of an unusual exodus of the agricultural surplus population caused by the demands of war,518 the vast extension of railroads, factories, mines, &c. The lower the wages, the higher is the propor- tion in which ever so insignificant a rise of them expresses itself. If the weekly wage, e.g., is 20s. and it rises to 22s., that is a rise of 10 per cent., but if it is only 7s. and it rises to 9s., that is a rise of 28^ per cent., which sounds very fine. Everywhere the farmers were howling, and the London Economist, with reference to these starvation wages, prattled quite seriously of "a general and substantial advance".1' What did the farmers do now? Did they wait until, in consequence of this brilliant remuneration, the agricultural labourers had so increas- ed and multiplied that their wages must fall again, as prescribed by the dogmatic economic brain? They introduced more machinery, and in a moment the labourers were redundant again in a proportion satisfactory even to the farmers. There was now "more capital" laid out in agriculture than before, and in a more productive form. With this the demand for labour fell, not only relatively, but absolutely.

The above economic fiction confuses the laws that regulate the gen- eral movement of wages, or the ratio between the working class — i. e., the total labour power—and the total social capital, with the laws that distribute the working population over the different spheres of production. If, e. g., in consequence of favourable circumstances, ac- cumulation in a particular sphere of production becomes especially active, and profits in it, being greater than the average profits, attract additional capital, of course the demand for labour rises and wages also rise. The higher wages draw a larger part of the working popula- tion into the more favoured sphere, until it is glutted with labour pow- er, and wages at length fall again to their average level or below it, if the pressure is too great. Then, not only does the immigration of la- bourers into the branch of industry in question cease; it gives place to their emigration. Here the political economist thinks he sees the why

[^1]: " Economist, Jan. 21, 1860 [No. 856, p. 64],





**[p. 633]**

and wherefore of an absolute increase of workers accompanying an increase of wages, and of a diminution of wages accompanying an absolute increase of labourers. But he sees really only the local oscil- lation of the labour market in a particular sphere of production — he sees only the phenomena accompanying the distribution of the work- ing population into the different spheres of outlay of capital, accord- ing to its varying needs.

The industrial reserve army, during the periods of stagnation and average prosperity, weighs down the active labour army; during the periods of overproduction and paroxysm, it holds its pretensions in check. Relative surplus population is therefore the pivot upon which the law of demand and supply of labour works. It confines the field of action of this law within the limits absolutely convenient to the activ- ity of exploitation and to the domination of capital.

This is the place to return to one of the grand exploits of economic apologetics. It will be remembered that if through the introduction of new, or the extension of old, machinery, a portion of variable capital is transformed into constant, the economic apologist interprets this operation which "fixes" capital and by that very act sets labourers "free", in exactly the opposite way, pretending that it sets free capital for the labourers. Only now can one fully understand the effrontery of these apologists. What are set free are not only the labourers imme- diately turned out by the machines, but also their future substitutes in the rising generation, and the additional contingent, that with the usual extension of trade on the old basis would be regularly absorbed. They are now all "set free", and every new bit of capital looking out for employment can dispose of them. Whether it attracts them or oth- ers, the effect on the general labour demand will be nil, if this capital is just sufficient to take out of the market as many labourers as the machines threw upon it. If it employs a smaller number, that of the supernumeraries increases; if it employs a greater, the general de- mand for labour only increases to the extent of the excess of the em- ployed over those "set free". The impulse that additional capital seeking an outlet, would otherwise have given to the general demand for labour, is therefore in every case neutralised to the extent of the la- bourers thrown out of employment by the machine. That is to say, the mechanism of capitalistic production so manages matters that the absolute increase of capital is accompanied by no corresponding rise in the general demand for labour. And this the apologist calls a com- pensation for the misery, the sufferings, the possible death of the dis-

