---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "( b.) The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class "
Page_Range: "660-669"
---

# ( b.) The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class 



**[p. 648]**

(b.) The Badly Paid Strata of the British Industrial Class

During the cotton famine of 1862, Dr. Smith was charged by the Privy Council 183 with an inquiry into the conditions of nourishment of the distressed operatives in Lancashire and Cheshire. His observa- tions during many preceding years had led him to the conclusion that "to avert starvation diseases", the daily food of an average woman ought to contain at least 3,900 grains of carbon with 180 grains of ni- trogen; the daily food of an average man, at least 4,300 grains of car- bon with 200 grains of nitrogen; for women, about the same quantity of nutritive elements as are contained in 2 lbs of good wheaten bread, for men — more; for the weekly average of adult men and women, at least 28,600 grains of carbon and 1,330 grains of nitrogen. His cal- culation was practically confirmed in a surprising manner by its agreement with the miserable quantity of nourishment to which want had forced down the consumption of the cotton operatives. This was, in December, 1862, 29,211 grains of carbon, and 1,295 grains of ni- trogen weekly.534

In the year 1863, the Privy Council ordered an inquiry into the state of distress of the worst-nourished part of the English working class. Dr. Simon, medical officer to the Privy Council, chose for this work the above-mentioned Dr. Smith. His inquiry ranges on the one hand over the agricultural labourers, on the other, over silk-weavers, needle-women, kid-glovers, stocking-weavers, glove-weavers, and

[^1]: 1 A peculiar light is thrown on the advance made since the time of Adam Smith, by the fact that by him the word "workhouse" is still occasionally used as synonymous with "manufactory"; e. g., the opening of his chapter on the division of labour: "those employed in every different branch of the work can often be collected into the same workhouse."533

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 475.





**[p. 649]**

shoemakers. The latter categories are, with the exception of the stock- ing-weavers, exclusively town-dwellers. It was made a rule in the in- quiry to select in each category the most healthy families, and those comparatively in the best circumstances. As a general result it was found that

"in only one of the examined classes of in-door operatives did the average nitrogen- supply just exceed, while in another it nearly reached, the estimated standard of bare sufficiency //i.e., sufficient to avert starvation diseases//, and that in two classes there was defect — in one, a very large defect — of both nitrogen and carbon. Moreover, as regards the examined families of the agricultural population, it appeared that more than a fifth were with less than the estimated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more than one-third were with less than the estimated sufficiency of nitrogenous food, and that in three counties (Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somersetshire), insufficiency of nitrogenous food was the average local diet." ''

Among the agricultural labourers, those of England, the wealthiest part of the United Kingdom, were the worst fed.2' The insufficiency of food among the agricultural labourers, fell, as a rule, chiefly on the women and children, for "the man must eat to do his work".535 Still greater penury ravaged the town workers examined.

"They are so ill fed that assuredly among them there must be many cases of severe and injurious privation." '

("Privation" of the capitalist all this! i.e., "abstinence" from pay- ing for the means of subsistence absolutely necessary for the mere vegetation of his "hands".)

The following table shows the conditions of nourishment of the above-named categories of purely town-dwelling workpeople, as com- pared with the minimum assumed by Dr. Smith, and with the food allowance of the cotton operatives during the time of their greatest distress:

[^1]: Both sexes Average weekly Average weekly carbon nitrogen

[^2]: Five in-door occupations 28,876 grains 1,192 grains Unemployed Lancashire Operatives . . 28,211 1,295

[^3]: Minimum quantity to be allowed to the Lancashire Operatives, equal number of males and females 28,600 " 1,330 "•"

[^4]: 1 "Public Health. Sixth Report, 1864," p. 13. ' 1. c, p. 17.

[^5]: •'•• I . e . , p . 1 3 . '• I.e., Appendix, p. 232.





**[p. 650]**



[^1]: "That cases are innumerable in which defective diet is the cause or the aggravator of disease, can be affirmed by any one who is conversant with poor law medical practice, or with the wards and out-patient rooms of hospitals Yet in this point of view, there is, in my opinion, a very important sanitary context to be added. It must be remem- bered that privation of food is very reluctantly borne, and that as a rule great poorness of diet will only come when other privations have preceded it. Long before insuffi- ciency of diet is a matter of hygienic concern, long before the physiologist would think of counting the grains of nitrogen and carbon which intervene between life and starva- tion, the household will have been utterly destitute of material comfort; clothing and fuel will have been even scantier than food — against inclemencies of weather there will have been no adequate protection — dwelling space will have been stinted to the de- gree in which overcrowding produces or increases disease; of household utensils and furniture there will have been scarcely any — even cleanliness will have been found costly or difficult, and if there still be self-respectful endeavours to maintain it, every such endeavour will represent additional pangs of hunger. The home, too, will be where shelter can be cheapest bought; in quarters where commonly there is least fruit of sanitary supervision, least drainage, least scavenging, least suppression of public nui- sances, least or worst water supply, and, if in town, least light and air. Such are the sa- nitary dangers to which poverty is almost certainly exposed, when it is poverty enough to imply scantiness of food. And while the sum of them is of terrible magnitude against

[^2]: " I.e., pp. 232, 233.





**[p. 651]**

The intimate connexion between the pangs of hunger of the most industrious layers of the working class, and the extravagant consump- tion, coarse or refined, of the rich, for which capitalist accumulation is the basis, reveals itself only when the economic laws are known. It is otherwise with the "housing of the poor". Every unprejudiced observ- er sees that the greater the centralisation of the means of production, the greater is the corresponding heaping together of the labourers, within a given space; that therefore the swifter capitalistic accumula- tion, the more miserable are the dwellings of the working people. "Improvements" of towns, accompanying the increase of wealth, by the demolition of badly built quarters, the erection of palaces for banks, warehouses, &c, the widening of streets for business traffic, for the carriages of luxury, and for the introduction of tramways, &c, drive away the poor into even worse and more crowded hiding places. On the other hand, every one knows that the dearness of dwel- lings is in inverse ratio to their excellence, and that the mines of mis- ery are exploited by house speculators with more profit or less cost than ever were the mines of Potosi536 The antagonistic character of capitalist accumulation, and therefore of the capitalistic relations of property generally,21 is here so evident, that even the official English reports on this subject teem with heterodox onslaughts on "property and its rights". With the development of industry, with the accumu- lation of capital, with the growth and "improvement" of towns, the evil makes such progress that the mere fear of contagious diseases which do not spare even "respectability", brought into existence from

[^1]: ' I.e., pp. 14, 15. 2 "In no particular have the rights of persons been so avowedly and shamefully sacrificed to the rights of property as in regard to the lodging of the labouring class. Every large town may be looked upon as a place of human sacrifice, a shrine where thousands pass yearly through the fire as offerings to the moloch of avarice," S. Laing, I.e., p. 150.





**[p. 652]**

"Speaking generally, it may be said that the evils are uncontrolled in England." 5 3 s

By order of the Privy Council, in 1864, an inquiry was made into the conditions of the housing of the agricultural labourers, in 1865 of the poorer classes in the towns. The results of the admirable work of Dr. Julian Hunter are to be found in the seventh (1865) and eighth (1866) reports on "Public Health". To the agricultural labourers, I shall come later. On the condition of town dwellings, I quote, as preliminary, a general remark of Dr. Simon.

"Although my official point of view," he says, "is one exclusively physical, common humanity requires that the other aspect of this evil should not be ignored In its higher degrees it //i. e., overcrowding// almost necessarily involves such negation of all delicacy, such unclean confusion of bodies and bodily functions, such exposure of ani- mal and sexual nakedness, as is rather bestial than human. To be subject to these in- fluences is a degradation which must become deeper and deeper for those on whom it continues to work. To children who are born under its curse, it must often be a very baptism into infamy. And beyond all measure hopeless is the wish that persons thus cir- cumstanced should ever in other respects aspire to that atmosphere of civilisation which has its essence in physical and moral cleanliness." h

London takes the first place in overcrowded habitations, absolu- tely unfit for human beings.

[^1]: "He feels clear," says Dr. Hunter, "on two points; first, that there are about 20 large colonies in London, of about 10,000 persons each, whose miserable condition ex- ceeds almost anything he has seen elsewhere in England, and is almost entirely the re- sult of their bad house accommodation; and second, that the crowded and dilapidated condition of the houses of these colonies is much worse than was the case 20 years ago."2 "It is not too much to say that life in parts of London and Newcastle is infernal." 3:

[^2]: 1 "Public Health. Eighth Report, 1866," p. 14, note. 2 1. c, p. 89. With reference to the children in these colonies, Dr. Hunter says: "People are not now alive to tell us how children were brought up before this age of dense agglomerations of poor began, and he would be a rash prophet who should tell us what future behaviour is to be expected from the present growth of children, who, under circumstances probably never before paralleled in this country, are now completing their education for future practice, as 'dangerous classes' by sitting up half the night with persons of every age, half naked, drunken, obscene, and quarrelsome" (I.e., p. 56).

[^3]: 3 I.e., p. 62.





**[p. 653]**

"Rents have become so heavy that few labouring men can afford more than one room." '

There is almost no house property in London that is not overbur- dened with a number of middlemen. For the price of land in London is always very high in comparison with its yearly revenue, and there- fore every buyer speculates on getting rid of it again at a jury price (the expropriation valuation fixed by jurymen), or on pocketing an extraordinary increase of value arising from the neighbourhood of some large establishment. As a consequence of this there is a regular trade in the purchase of "fag-ends of leases".

"Gentlemen in this business may be fairly expected to do as they do—get all they can from the tenants while they have them, and leave as little as they can for their successors."21

The rents are weekly, and these gentlemen run no risk. In conse- quence of the making of railroads in the City,

The workhouses are already overcrowded, and the "improve- ments" already sanctioned by Parliament are only just begun. If la- bourers are driven away by the demolition of their old houses, they do not leave their old parish, or at most they settle down on its bor- ders, as near as they can get to it.

[^1]: "the spectacle has lately been seen in the East of London of a number of families wandering about some Saturday night with their scanty worldly goods on their backs, without any resting place but the workhouse."3'

[^2]: "They try, of course, to remain as near as possible to their workshops. The inhabi- tants do not go beyond the same or the next parish, parting their two-room tenements into single rooms, and crowding even those. Even at an advanced rent, the people who are displaced will hardly be able to get an accommodation so good as the meagre one they have left. Half the workmen of the Strand walked two miles to their work."4

[^3]: ,; "Report of the Officer of Health of St. Martins-in-the-Fields, 1865."539

[^4]: * "Public Health. Eighth Report, 1865," p. 91. 3 1. c, p. 88. <• I.e., p. 88.





**[p. 654]**

"Either," says Dr. Hunter, "the whole proceeding will of necessity stop as an absurd- ity, or the public compassion (!) be effectually aroused to the obligation which may now be without exaggeration called national, of supplying cover to those who by rea- son of their having no capital, cannot provide it for themselves, though they can by periodical payments reward those who will provide it for them." ,;

Admire this capitalistic justice! The owner of land, of houses, the businessman, when expropriated by "improvements" such as rail- roads, the building of new streets, &c, not only receives full indem- nity. He must, according to law, human and divine, be comforted for his enforced "abstinence" over and above this by a thumping prof- it. The labourer, with his wife and child and chattels, is thrown out into the street, and — if he crowds in too large numbers towards quarters of the town where the vestries insist on decency, he is prose- cuted in the name of sanitation!

Except London, there was at the beginning of the 19th century no single town in England of 100,000 inhabitants. Only five had more than 50,000. Now there are 28 towns with more than 50,000 inhabi- tants.

The more rapidly capital accumulates in an industrial or commer- cial town, the more rapidly flows the stream of exploitable human

» I.e., p. 89. !' 1. c, p. 56.

[^1]: "The result of this change is not only that the class of town people is enormously in- creased, but the old close-packed little towns are now centres, built round on every side, open nowhere to air, and being no longer agreeable to the rich are abandoned by them for the pleasanter outskirts. The successors of these rich are occupying the larger houses at the rate of a family to each room // and find accommodation for two or three lodgers // and a population, for which the houses were not intended and quite unfit, has been created, whose surroundings are truly degrading to the adults and ruinous to the children."21





**[p. 655]**

Newcastle-on-Tyne, as the centre of a coal and iron district of growing productiveness, takes the next place after London in the housing inferno. Not less than 34,000 persons live there in single rooms. Because of their absolute danger to the community, houses in great numbers have lately been destroyed by the authorities in New- castle and Gateshead. The building of new houses progresses very slowly, business very quickly. The town was, therefore, in 1865, more full than ever. Scarcely a room was to let. Dr. Embleton, of the New- castle Fever Hospital, says:

"There can be little doubt that the great cause of the continuance and spread of the typhus has been the overcrowding of human beings, and the uncleanliness of their dwellings. The rooms, in which labourers in many cases live, are situated in confined and unwholesome yards or courts, and for space, light, air, and cleanliness, are models of insufficiency and insalubrity, and a disgrace to any civilised community; in them men, women, and children lie at night huddled together; and as regards the men, the night-shift succeeds the day-shift, and the day-shift the night-shift in unbroken scries for some time together, the beds having scarcely time to cool; the whole house badly sup- plied with water and worse with privies; dirty, unventilated, and pestiferous." "

The price per week of such lodgings ranges from 8d. to 3s.

As a result of the ebbing and flowing of capital and labour, the state of the dwellings of an industrial town may today be bearable, tomorrow hideous. Or the aedileship of the town may have pulled it- self together for the removal of the most shocking abuses. Tomorrow, like a swarm of locusts, come crowding in masses of ragged Irishmen or decayed English agricultural labourers. They are stowed away in cellars and lofts, or the hitherto respectable labourer's dwelling is transformed into a lodging-house whose personnel changes as quickly as the billets in the 30 years' war.540 Example: Bradford (Yorkshire). There the municipal philistine was just busied with urban improve- ments. Besides, there were still in Bradford, in 1861, 1,751 uninhabit- ed houses. But now comes that revival of trade which the mildly liber- al Mr. Forster, the negro's friend, recently crowed over with so much grace.541 With the revival of trade came of course an overflow from

[^1]: "The town of Newcastle-on-Tyne," says Dr. Hunter, "contains a sample of the fin- est tribe of our countrymen, often sunk by external circumstances of house and street into an almost savage degradation."21

[^2]: 11 I.e., p. 149 [note]. 21 I.e., p. 50.





**[p. 6]**

"In one small cellar measuring 1,500 cubic feet there are ten persons Vincent Street, Green Aire Place, and the Leys include 223 houses having 1,450 inhabitants, 435 beds, and 36 privies The beds — and in that term I include any roll of dirty old

• COLLECTING AGENTS' LIST (BRADFORD) Houses Vulcan Street, No. 122 Lumley Street, No. 13 Bower Street, No. 41 Portland Street, No. 112 Hardy Street, No. 17 North Street, No. 18 North Street, No. 17 Wymer Street, No. 19 Jowett Street, No. 56

16 persons 11 11 10 " 10 " 16 " 13 " 8 adults 12 persons 3 families 11 persons 10 " 3 families 18 persons 16 " 17

[^1]: George Street, No. 150 Rifle Court Marygate, No. 11 Marshall Street, No. 28 Marshall Street, No. 49 George Street, No. 128 George Street, No. 130 Edward Street, No. 4 George Street, No. 49 York Street, No. 34 Salt Pie Street (bottom)

[^2]: Cellars Regent Square Acre Street 33 Roberts Court Back Pratt Street, used as a brazier's shop 27 Ebenezer Street

[^3]: eel

[^4]: I.e..

[^5]: 2 families

[^6]: 2 " 26 persons

[^7]: 8 persons

[^8]: " " " (no male above 18).



