---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "( c.) The Nomad Population "
Page_Range: "669-672"
---

# ( c.) The Nomad Population 



**[p. 657]**

Bristol takes the third place after London in the misery of its dwel- lings.

"Bristol, where the blankest poverty and domestic misery abound in the wealthiest town of Europe." 2

(c.) The Nomad Population

We turn now to a class of people whose origin is agricultural, but whose occupation is in great part industrial. They are the light infan- try of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to this point, now to that. When they are not on the march, they "camp". Nomad labour is used for various operations of building and draining, brick- making, lime-burning, railway-making, &c.542 A flying column of pestilence, it carries into the places in whose neighbourhood it pitches its camp, small-pox, typhus, cholera, scarlet fever, &c.31 In undertak- ings that involve much capital outlay, such as railways, &c, the contractor himself generally provides his army with wooden huts and the like, thus improvising villages without any sanitary provisions, outside the control of the local boards, very profitable to the contrac- tor, who exploits the labourers in two-fold fashion — as soldiers of in- dustry and as tenants. According as the wooden hut contains 1, 2, or 3 holes, its inhabitant, navvy, or whatever he may be, has to pay 2, 3, or 4 shillings weekly.4 One example will suffice. In September, 1864, Dr. Simon reports that the Chairman of the Nuisances Removal Committee of the parish of Sevenoaks sent the following denunciation to Sir George Grey, Home Secretary: —

[^1]: "Small-pox cases were rarely heard of in this parish until about twelve months ago. Shortly before that time, the works for a railway from Lewisham to Tunbridge were

[^2]: " I.e., p. 114. 2 I.e., p. 50. » "Public Health. Seventh Report, 1864, " p. 18. « I.e., p. 165.





**[p. 658]**

The labourers in coal and other mines belong to the best paid cate- gories of the British proletariat. The price at which they buy their wages was shown on an earlier page.2' Here I merely cast a hurried

[^1]: 1 I.e., p. 18, note.— The Relieving Officer of the Chapel-en-le-Frith Union re- ported to the Registrar-General as follows: — "At Doveholes, a number of small exca- vations have been made into a large hillock of lime ashes (the refuse of lime-kilns), and which are used as dwellings, and occupied by labourers and others employed in the construction of a railway now in course of construction through that neighbourhood. The excavations are small and damp, and have no drains or privies about them, and not the slightest means of ventilation except up a hole pulled through the top, and used for a chimney. In consequence of this defect, small-pox has been raging for some time, and some deaths //amongst the troglodytes// have been caused by it" (I.e., note 2).

[^2]: ! The details given at the end of Part IV [this volume, pp. 497-504] refer espe- cially to the labourers in coal mines. On the still worse condition in metal mines, see the very conscientious Report of the Royal Commission of 1864. 5"





**[p. 659]**

"The lodging which is obtained by the pitman and other labourers connected with the collieries of Northumberland and Durham," says Dr. Julian Hunter, "is perhaps, on the whole, the worst and the dearest of which any large specimens can be found in England, the similar parishes of Monmouthshire excepted The extreme badness is in the high number of men found in one room, in the smallness of the ground plot on which a great number of houses are thrust, the want of water, the absence of privies, and the frequent placing of one house on the top of another, or distribution into flats, the lessee acts as if the whole colony were encamped, not resident." ''

[^1]: "In pursuance of my instructions," says Dr. Stevens, "I visited most of the large colliery villages in the Durham Union. With very few exceptions, the general state- ment that no means are taken to secure the health of the inhabitants would be true of all of them All colliers are bound //'bound,' an expression which, like bondage,3 dates from the age of serfdom// to the colliery lessee or owner for twelve months If the col- liers express discontent, or in any way annoy the 'viewer', a mark of memorandum is made against their names, and, at the annual 'binding', such men are turned off It appears to me that no part of the 'truck system' could be worse than what obtains in these densely-populated districts. The collier is bound to take as part of his hiring a house surrounded with pestiferous influences; he cannot help himself, and it appears doubtful whether anyone else can help him except his proprietor (he is, to all intents and purposes, a serf), and his proprietor first consults his balance-sheet, and the result is tolerably certain. The collier is also often supplied with water by the proprietor, which, whether it be good or bad, he has to pay for, or rather he suffers a deduction for from his wages."2|

[^2]: " I.e., pp. 180, 182. *• I.e., pp. 515, 517.

[^3]: a See this volume, p. 577, footnote 2.



