---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "( d.) Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working Class "
Page_Range: "672-677"
---

# ( d.) Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working Class 



**[p. 660]**

"In apology for the wretched household accommodation it is alleged that miners are commonly worked on lease; that the duration of the lessee's interest (which in col- lieries is commonly for 21 years), is not so long that he should deem it worth his while to create good accommodation for his labourers, and for the tradespeople and others whom the work attracts; that even if he were disposed to act liberally in the matter, this disposition would commonly be defeated by his landlord's tendency to fix on him, as ground rent, an exorbitant additional charge for the privilege of having on the surface of the ground the decent and comfortable village which the labourers of the subterra- nean property ought to inhabit, and that prohibitory price (if not actual prohibition) equally excludes others who might desire to build. It would be foreign to the purpose of this report to enter upon any discussion of the merits of the above apology. Nor here is it even needful to consider where it would be that, if decent accommodation were pro- vided, the cost would eventually fall — whether on landlord, or lessee, or labourer, or public. But in presence of such shameful facts as are vouched for in the annexed re- ports" (those of Dr. Hunter, Dr. Stevens, &c.) "a remedy may well be claimed. Claims of landlordship are being so used as to do great public wrong. The landlord in his capacity of mine-owner invites an industrial colony to labour on his estate, and then in his capacity of surface-owner makes it impossible that the labourers whom he col- lects, should find proper lodging where they must live. The lessee" (the capitalist ex- ploiter) "meanwhile has no pecuniary motive for resisting that division of the bargain; well knowing that if its latter conditions be exorbitant, the consequences fall, not on him, that his labourers on whom they fall have not education enough to know the value of their sanitary rights, that neither obscenest lodging nor foulest drinking water will be appreciable inducements towards a 'strike.'"11

(d.) Effect of Crises on the Best Paid Part of the Working Class

Before I turn to the regular agricultural labourers, I may be al- lowed to show, by one example, how industrial revulsions affect even the best-paid, the aristocracy, of the working class. It will be remem- bered that the year 1857 brought one of the great crises with which the industrial cycle periodically ends. The next termination of the cy-

[^1]: " I.e., p. 16.





**[p. 661]**

"In the East End districts of Poplar, Millwall, Greenwich, Deptford, Limehouse and Canning Town, at least 15,000 workmen and their families were in a state of utter des- titution, and 3,000 skilled mechanics were breaking stones in the workhouse yard" (af- ter distress of over half a year's duration) "I had great difficulty in reaching the workhouse door, for a hungry crowd besieged it They were waiting for their tickets, but the time had not yet arrived for the distribution. The yard was a great square place with an open shed running all round it, and several large heaps of snow covered the paving-stones in the middle. In the middle, also, were little wicker-fenced spaces, like sheep pens, where in finer weather the men worked; but on the day of my visit the pens were so snowed up that nobody could sit in them. Men were busy, however, in the open shed breaking paving-stones into macadam. Each man had a big paving-stone for a seat, and he chipped away at the rime-covered granite with a big hammer until he had broken up, and think! five bushels of it, and then he had done his day's work, and got his day's pay — threepence and an allowance of food. In another part of the yard was a rickety little wooden house, and when we opened the door of it, we found it filled

[^1]: l! "Wholesale starvation of the London Poor Within the last few days the walls of London have been placarded with large posters, bearing the following remarkable announcement: — 'Fat oxen! Starving men! The fat oxen from their palace of glass have gone to feed the rich in their luxurious abode, while the starving men are left to rot and die in their wretched dens.' The placards bearing these ominous words are put up at certain intervals. No sooner has one set been defaced or covered over, than a fresh set is placarded in the former, or some equally public place This reminds one of the secret revolutionary associations which prepared the French people for the events of 1789 545 At this moment, while English workmen with their wives and children are dying of cold and hunger, there are millions of English gold — the produce of English labour — being invested in Russian, Spanish, Italian, and other foreign enterprises.—" Reynolds's Newspaper, January 20th, 1867 [p. 1, col. 1J.





**[p. 662]**

On the after pains of the crisis of 1866, the following extract from a Tory newspaper. It must not be forgotten that the East-end of Lon- don, which is here dealt with, is not only the seat of the iron ship- building mentioned above, but also of a so-called "home industry" always underpaid.



**[p. 663]**

As it is the fashion amongst English capitalists to quote Belgium as the Paradise of the labourer because "freedom of labour", or what is the same thing, "freedom of capital", is there limited neither by the despotism of Trades' Unions, nor by Factory Acts, a word or two on the "happiness" of the Belgian labourer. Assuredly no one was more thoroughly initiated in the mysteries of this happiness than the late M. Ducpétiaux, inspector-general of Belgian prisons and charitable institutions, and member of the central commission of Belgian statis- tics. Let us take his work: "Budgets économiques des classes ouvrières de la Belgique," Bruxelles, 1855. Here we find among other matters, a normal Belgian labourer's family, whose yearly income and expen- diture he calculates on very exact data, and whose conditions of nour- ishment are then compared with those of the soldier, sailor, and pris- oner. The family "consists of father, mother, and four children". Of these 6 persons "four may be usefully employed the whole year through". It is assumed that "there is no sick person nor one incapa- ble of work, among them", nor are there "expenses for religious, mor- al, and intellectual purposes, except a very small sum for church sit- tings", nor "contributions to savings banks or benefit societies", nor "expenses due to luxury or the result of improvidence". The father and eldest son, however, allow themselves "the use of tobacco", and on Sundays "go to the cabaret", for which a whole 86 centimes a week are reckoned.

[^1]: "From a general compilation of wages allowed to the labourers in different trades, it follows that the highest average of daily wage is 1 franc 56c, for men, 89 centimes for women, 56 centimes for boys, and 55 centimes for girls. Calculated at this rate, the re- sources of the family would amount, at the maximum, to 1,068 francs a-year. In the family taken as typical we have calculated all possible resources. But in ascribing wages to the mother of the family we raise the question of the direction ojthe household. How will its internal economy be cared for? Who will look after the young children? Who will get ready the meals, do the washing and mending? This is the dilemma incessantly presented to the labourers."





**[p. 165]**

The father 300 working days at fr. 1.56 fr. 468 " mother " " " " " 89 " " boy " " " " " 56 " " girl " " " " " 55 "

Total fr. 1,068

The annual expenditure of the family would cause a deficit upon the hypothesis that the labourer has the food of:

The man of war's man fr. 1,828 Deficit fr. 760 " soldier " 1,473 " 405 " prisoner " 1,112 " 44

"We see that few labouring families can reach, we will not say the average of the sailor or soldier, but even that of the prisoner. The general average (of the cost of each prisoner in the different prisons during the period 1847-1849), has been 63 centimes for all prisons. This figure, compared with that of the daily maintenance of the labourer, shows a difference of 13 centimes. It must be remarked further, that if in the prisons it is necessary to set down in the account the expenses of administration and surveillance, on the other hand, the prisoners have not to pay for their lodging; that the purchases they make at the canteens are not included in the expenses of maintenance, and that these expenses are greatly lowered in consequence of the large number of persons that make up the establishments, and of contracting for or buying wholesale, the food and other things that enter into their consumption. How comes it, however, that a great number, we might say, a great majority, of labourers, live in a more economical way? It is by adopting expedients, the secret of which only the labourer knows; by reduc- ing his daily rations; by substituting rye-bread for wheat; by eating less meat, or even none at all, and the same with butter and condiments; by contenting themselves with one or two rooms where the family is crammed together, where boys and girls sleep side by side, often on the same pallet; by economy of clothing, washing, decency; by giving up the Sunday diversions; by, in short, resigning themselves to the most painful priva- tions. Once arrived at this extreme limit, the least rise in the price of food, stoppage of work, illness, increases the labourer's distress and determines his complete ruin; debts accumulate, credit fails, the most necessary clothes and furniture are pawned, and finally, the family asks to be enrolled on the list of paupers" (Ducpétiaux, 1. c, pp. 151-56).

In fact, in this "Paradise of capitalists" there follows, on the smal- lest change in the price of the most essential means of subsistence, a change in the number of deaths and crimes! (See Manifesto of the Maatschappij: "De Vlamingen Vooruit!" Brussels, 1860, pp. 13, 14.) In all Belgium are 930,000 families, of whom, according to the official statistics, 90,000 are wealthy and on the list of voters = 450,000 per- sons; 390,000 families of the lower middle-class in towns and villages, the greater part of them constantly sinking into the proletar-

