---
Volume: 35
Document_Title: "( e.) The British Agricultural Proletariat "
Page_Range: "677-700"
---

# ( e.) The British Agricultural Proletariat 

(e.) The British Agricultural Proletariat

Nowhere does the antagonistic character of capitalistic production and accumulation assert itself more brutally than in the progress of English agriculture (including cattle-breeding) and the retrogression of the English agricultural labourer. Before I turn to his present situa- tion, a rapid retrospect. Modern agriculture dates in England from the middle of the 18th century, although the revolution in landed property, from which the changed mode of production starts as a basis, has a much earlier date.

If we take the statements of Arthur Young, a careful observer, though a superficial thinker, as to the agricultural labourer of 1771,548 the latter plays a very pitiable part compared with his pre- decessor of the end of the 14th century,

not to speak of the 15th century, "the golden age of the English la- bourer in town and country".3 We need not, however, go back so far. In a very instructive work of the year 1777 we read:

[^1]: "when the labourer could live in plenty, and accumulate wealth,"'

[^2]: "The great farmer is nearly mounted to a level with him" (the gentleman); "while the poor labourer is depressed almost to the earth. His unfortunate situation will fully appear, by taking a comparative view of it, only forty years ago, and at present Landlord and tenant have both gone hand in hand in keeping the labourer down." "

[^3]: It is then proved in detail that the real agricultural wages between 1737 and 1777 fell nearly — or 25 per cent.549

[^4]: 1 James E. Thorold Rogers (Prof, of Polit. Econ. in the University of Oxford), A History of Agriculture and Prices in England, Oxford, 1866, v. 1, pp. 689-90. This work, the fruit of patient and diligent labour, contains in the two volumes that have so far ap- peared, only the period from 1259 to 1400. The second volume contains simply statis- tics. It is the first authentic History of Prices of the time that we possess.

[^5]: 2 Reasons for the Late Increase of the Poor-Rates: or a comparative view of the prices of la- bour and provisions, Lond., 1777, pp. 5, 11.

[^6]: a See this volume, p. 709.





**[p. 666]**

Nevertheless, the position of the English agricultural labourer from 1770 to 1780, with regard to his food and dwelling, as well as to his self-respect, amusements, &c, is an ideal never attained again since that time. His average wage expressed in pints of wheat was from 1770 to 1771, 90 pints, in Eden's time (1797) only 65, in 1808 but 60.2'

The state of the agricultural labourer at the end of the Anti-Jacobin War,464 during which landed proprietors, farmers, manufacturers, merchants, bankers, stockbrokers, army-contractors, &c, enriched themselves so extraordinarily, has been already indi- cated above. The nominal wages rose in consequence partly of the bank-note depreciation, partly of a rise in the price of the primary means of subsistence independent of this depreciation. But the actual wage variation can be evidenced in a very simple way, without enter- ing into details that are here unnecessary. The Poor Law 5 5 ° and its administration were in 1795 and 1814 the same. It will be remem- bered how this law was carried out in the country districts: in the form of alms the parish made up the nominal wage to the nominal sum re- quired for the simple vegetation of the labourer. The ratio between the wages paid by the farmer, and the wage deficit made good by the parish, shows us two things. First, the falling of wages below their min- imum; second, the degree in which the agricultural labourer was a compound of wage labourer and pauper, or the degree in which he had been turned into a serf of his parish. Let us take one county that represents the average condition of things in all counties. In North- amptonshire, in 1795, the average weekly wage was 7s. 6d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 6 persons, £36 12s. 5d.; their total income, £29 18s.; deficit made good by the parish, £6 14s. 5d. In 1814, in the same county, the weekly wage was 12s. 2d.; the total yearly expenditure of a family of 5 persons, £54 18s. 4d.; their total

[^1]: |J Dr. Richard Price, Observations on Reversionary Payments, 6th Ed. By W. Morgan, Lond., 1803, v. II, p. 158. Price remarks on p. 159: "The nominal price of day labour is at present no more than about four times, or, at most, five times higher than it was in the year 1514. But the price of corn is seven times, and of flesh-meat and raiment about fifteen times higher. So far, therefore, has the price of labour been even from advancing in proportion to the increase in the expenses of living, that it does not appear that it bears now half the proportion to those expenses that it did bear."

[^2]: '''• Barton, I.e., p. 26. For the end of the 18th century cf. Eden, I.e.





**[p. 667]**

"the Swing riots, l 9 4 in 1830, revealed to us" (i.e., the ruling classes) "by the light of blazing corn-stacks, that misery and black mutinous discontent smouldered quite as fiercely under the surface of agricultural as of manufacturing England." 3»

At this time, Sadler, in the House of Commons, christened the agricultural labourers "white slaves", and a Bishop echoed the epithet in the Upper House.551 The most notable political economist ofthat period — E. G. Wakefield says:

"The peasant of the South of England is not a freeman, nor is he a slave; he is a pauper."41

The time just before the repeal of the Corn Laws 2 ' threw new light on the condition of the agricultural labourers. On the one hand, it was to the interest of the middle-class agitators to prove how little the Corn Laws protected the actual producers of the corn. On the other hand, the industrial bourgeoisie foamed with sullen rage at the de- nunciations of the factory system by the landed aristocracy, at the pretended sympathy with the woes of the factory operatives, of those utterly corrupt, heartless, and genteel loafers, and at their "diplo- matic zeal" for factory legislation. It is an old English proverb that "when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own", and, in fact, the noisy, passionate quarrel between the two fractions of the ruling class about the question, which of the two exploited the labourers the more shamefully, was on each hand the midwife of the truth. Earl Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, was commander-in-chief in the aris- tocratic, philanthropic, anti-factory campaign.552 He was, therefore, in 1845, a favourite subject in the revelations of the Morning Chronicle

[^1]: " Parry, I.e., [The Question of the Necessity, Ld., 1816,] p. 80. •" id., p. 213. 31 S. Laing, 1. c, p. 62. 41 England and America, Lond., 1833, Vol. I, p. 47.

[^2]: a See this volume, p. 207.





**[p. 2]**

FIRST VILLAGE

^ a ->. a

<~ ^

be SP

com amil

* !

icom

o fe " ^ <U - b 5^ "ö E t-l v u £ «J .5 >. c >.s

Î -3

Childr,

} Numb embers i

1 Weekl the Me1

) Weekl the Chi

) Weekl the who

Weekl;

) Total

ige after Rent

) Weekl r head

S A S Ä'ö S "3 i-'S Se Z i Sî'ô £ 8 ,

S.d. s.d. s.d. s.d. s.d. 2 4 8 0 — 8 0 2 0 6 0 1 6 3 5 8 0 — 8 0 1 6 6 6 1 3'/2 2 4 8 0 — 8 0 1 0 7 0 1 9 2 4 8 0 — 8 0 1 0 7 0 1 9 6 8 7 0 ls.6d. 10 6 2 0 8 6 1 Q'l* 3 5 7 0 2s. 7 0 1 4 5 8 1 P/2

[^1]: SECOND VILLAGE

[^2]: s.d. s.d. s.d. s.d. s.d. 6 8 7 0 ls.6d. 10 0 1 6 8 6 1 03/4 6 8 7 0 ls.6d. 7 0 1 3'/2 5 8'/2 0 8'/2 8 10 7 0 — 7 0 1 3'/* 5 8'/2 0 7 4 6 7 0 — 7 0 1 6'/. 5 5'/2 0 11 3 5 7 0 — 7 0 1 6'/2 5 5'/2 1 1

[^3]: THIRD VILLAGE

[^4]: s.d. s.d. s.d. s.d. s.d. 7 0 — 7 0 1 0 6 0 1 0 7 0 2s. 11 6 0 10 10 8 2 l'/2 5 0 2s.6d. 5 0 1 0 4 0 2 0')

[^5]: London Economist, March 29th, 1845, p. 290.





**[p. 669]**

this disproportion obtains much more for the last period, when a positive decrease of the agricultural population went hand in hand with increase of the area under cultivation, with more intensive culti-

[^1]: "The increase of farmers and farm-labourers, since 1801, bears no kind of propor- tion to the increase of agricultural produce,"41

[^2]: " The landed aristocracy advanced themselves to this end, of course per Parlia- ment, funds from the State Treasury, at a very low rate of interest, which the farmers have to make good at a much higher rate.

[^3]: 2; The decrease of the middle-class farmers can be seen especially in the census cat- egory: "Farmer's son, grandson, brother, nephew, daughter, grand-daughter, sister, niece"; in a word, the members of his own family, employed by the farmer. This cate- gory numbered, in 1851, 216,851 persons; in 1861, only 176,151. From 1851 to 1871, the farms under 20 acres fell by more than 900 in number; those between 50 and 75 acres fell from 8,253 to 6,370; the same thing occurred with all other farms under 100 acres. On the other hand, during the same twenty years, the number of large farms in- creased; those of 300-500 acres rose from 7,771 to 8,410, those of more than 500 acres from 2,755 to 3,914, those of more than 1,000 acres from 492 to 582.

[^4]: 51 The number of shepherds increased from 12,517 to 25,559.555

[^5]: 41 Census, 1. c , p. 36.





**[p. 670]**

But Professor Rogers comes to the conclusion that the lot of the English agricultural labourer of to-day, not to speak of his predecessor in the last half of the 14th and in the 15th century, but only compared with his predecessor from 1770 to 1780,556 has changed for the worse to an extraordinary extent, that "the peasant has again become a serf, and a serf worse fed and worse clothed." Dr. Julian Hunter, in his epoch-making report on the dwellings of the agricultural labour- ers, says:

"The cost of the hind" (a name for the agricultural labourer, inherited from the time of serfdom) "is fixed at the lowest possible amount on which he can live the sup- plies of wages and shelter are not calculated on the profit to be derived from him. He is a zero in farming calculations2 The means //of subsistence// being always supposed to be a fixed quantity.' As to any further reduction of his income, he may say, nihil ha- beo nihil curoß He has no fears for the future, because he has now only the spare supply necessary to keep him. He has reached the zero from which are dated the calculations of the farmer. Come what will, he has no share either in prosperity or adversity.""

In the year 1863, an official inquiry took place into the conditions of nourishment and labour of the criminals condemned to transporta- tion and penal servitude. The results are recorded in two voluminous Blue Books.9 Among other things it is said:

[^1]: 1 Rogers, 1. c, p. 693, p. 10. Mr. Rogers belongs to the Liberal School, is a per- sonal friend of Cobden and Bright, and therefore no laudator lemporis acti.c

[^2]: * "Public Health. Seventh Report," 1865, p. 242. It is therefore nothing unusual either for the landlord to raise a labourer's rent as soon as he hears that he is earning a little more, or for the farmer to lower the wage of the labourer, "because his wife has found a trade", 1. c. " I.e., p. 135. 4! I.e., p. 134.

[^3]: a after so many vicissitudes - b according to the orthodox rules - c singer of praise of time gone by (Horace, Ars poetica, 173). - d I have nothing and I do not care about anything.





**[p. 671]**

A few characteristic depositions of witnesses: John Smith, governor of the Edinburgh prison, deposes:

No. 5056. "The diet of the English prisons //is// superior to that of ordinary labour- ers in England." No. 5057. "It is the fact that the ordinary agricultural labourers in Scotland very seldom get any meat at all." Answer No. 3047. "Is there anything that you are aware of to account for the necessity of feeding them very much better than or- dinary labourers? — Certainly not." No. 3048. "Do you think that further experiments ought to be made in order to ascertain whether a dietary might not be hit upon for prisoners employed on public works nearly approaching to the dietary of free labour- ers?" 3' "He //the agricultural labourer// might say: 'I work hard, and have not enough to eat, and when in prison I did not work harder where I had plenty to eat, and therefore it is better for me to be in prison again than here.'"41

From the tables appended to the first volume of the Report I have compiled the annexed comparative summary.

WEEKLY AMOUNT OF NUTRIMENT

The general result of the inquiry by the medical commission of 1863 on the food of the lowest fed classes, is already known to the read- er. He will remember that the diet of a great part of the agricultural

[^1]: Quantity of Nitrogenous Ingredients

[^2]: Quantity of Non-Nitrogenous

[^3]: Ingredients

[^4]: Quantity of Mineral Matter Total

[^5]: Portland (convict) . . Sailor in the Navy . .

[^6]: Ounces 28.95 29.63 25.55 24.53 21.24 17.73

[^7]: Ounces 150.06 152.91 114.49 162.06 100.83 118.06

[^8]: Ounces 4.68 4.52 3.94 4.23 3.12 3.29

[^9]: Ounces 183.69 187.06 143.98 190.82 125.19 139.08s'

[^10]: Working Coachmaker

[^11]: Ounces 28.95 29.63 25.55 24.53 21.24 17.73

[^12]: Ounces 150.06 152.91 114.49 162.06 100.83 118.06

[^13]: Ounces 4.68 4.52 3.94 4.23 3.12 3.29

[^14]: Ounces 183.69 187.06 143.98 190.82 125.19 139.08s' Agricultural labourer

[^15]: Ounces 28.95 29.63 25.55 24.53 21.24 17.73

[^16]: Ounces 150.06 152.91 114.49 162.06 100.83 118.06

[^17]: Ounces 4.68 4.52 3.94 4.23 3.12 3.29

[^18]: Ounces 183.69 187.06 143.98 190.82 125.19 139.08s'

[^19]: " Report of the Commissioners Relating to Transportation and Penal Servitude, Lond., 1863, p. 42, n. 50.

[^20]: 2; I.e., p. 77. "Memorandum by the Lord Chief Justice." 31 I.e., Vol. II, Minutes of Evidence [pp. 418, 239]. " 1. c , Vol. I, Appendix, p. 280. 51 I.e., pp. 274, 275.





**[p. 672]**

"The nourishment obtained by the labourer himself," says Dr. E. Smith, "is larger than the average quantity indicates, since he eats a larger share necessary to enable him to perform his labour of food than the other members of the family, including in the poorer districts nearly all the meat and bacon The quantity of food obtained by the wife and also by the children at the period of rapid growth, is in many cases, in al- most every county, deficient, and particularly in nitrogen."11

The male and female servants living with the farmers themselves are sufficiently nourished. Their number fell from 288,272 in 1851, to 204,962 in 1861.555

"The labour of women in the fields," says Dr. Smith, "whatever may be its disad- vantages, is under present circumstances of great advantage to the family, since it adds that amount of income which provides shoes and clothing and pays the rent, and thus enables the family to be better fed."21

One of the most remarkable results of the inquiry was that the agri- cultural labourer of England, as compared with other parts of the United Kingdom, "is considerably the worst fed", as the appended table shows:

Quantities of Carbon and Nitrogen weekly consumed by an aver- age agricultural adult:

[^1]: Carbon, Nitrogen, grains grains

[^2]: England 40,673 1,594 Wales 48,354 2,031 Scotland 48,980 2,348 Ireland 43,366 2,434s>

[^3]: " "Public Health. Sixth Report," 1864, pp. 238, 249, 261, 262. 21 I.e., p. 262. 31 I.e., p. 17. The English agricultural labourer receives only '/« as much milk, and '/•i as much bread as the Irish. Arthur Young in his Tour in Ireland, at the beginning of this century, already noticed the better nourishment of the latter. The reason is simply this, that the poor Irish farmer is incomparably more humane than the rich English. As regards Wales, that which is said in the text holds only for the south-west. All the doc- tors there agree that the increase of the death-rate through tuberculosis, scrofula, etc., increases in intensity with the deterioration of the physical condition of the population, and all ascribe this deterioration to poverty. "His" (the farm labourer's) "keep is reck- oned at about five pence a day, but in many districts it was said to be of much less





**[p. 673]**

"To the insufficient quantity and miserable quality of the house accommodation generally had," says Dr. Simon, in his official Health Report, "by our agricultural la- bourers, almost every page of Dr. Hunter's report bears testimony. And gradually, for many years past, the state of the labourer in these respects has been deteriorating, house-room being now greatly more difficult for him to find, and, when found, greatly less suitable to his needs than, perhaps, for centuries had been the case. Especially within the last twenty or thirty years, the evil has been in very rapid increase, and the household circumstances of the labourer are now in the highest degree deplorable. Ex- cept in so far as they whom his labour enriches, see fit to treat him with a kind of pitiful indulgence, he is quite peculiarly helpless in the matter. Whether he shall find house- cost to the farmer" //himself very poor// "A morsel of the salt meat or bacon, salt- ed and dried to the texture of mahogany, and hardly worth the difficult process of assim- ilation is used to flavour a large quantity of broth or gruel, of meal and leeks, and day after day this is the labourer's dinner." The advance of industry resulted for him, in this harsh and damp climate, in "the abandonment of the solid homespun clothing in favour of the cheap and so-called cotton goods", and of stronger drinks for so-called tea. "The agriculturist, after several hours' exposure to wind and rain, gains his cottage to sit by a fire of peat or of balls of clay and small coal kneaded together, from which volumes of carbonic and sulphurous acids are poured forth. His walls are of mud and stones, his floor the bare earth which was there before the hut was built, his roof a mass of loose and sodden thatch. Every crevice is stopped to maintain warmth, and in an at- mosphere of diabolic odour, with a mud floor, with his only clothes drying on his back, he often sups and sleeps with his wife and children. Obstetricians who have passed parts of the night in such cabins have described how they found their feet sinking in the mud of the floor, and they were forced (easy task) to drill a hole through the wall to ef- fect a little private respiration. It was attested by numerous witnesses in various grades of life, that to these insanitary influences, and many more, the underfed peasant was nightly exposed, and of the result, a debilitated and scrofulous people, there was no want of evidence The statements of the relieving officers of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire show in a striking way the same state of things. There is besides "a plague more horrible still, the great number of idiots". Now a word on the climatic conditions. "A strong south-west wind blows over the whole country for 8 or 9 months in the year, bringing with it torrents of rain, which discharge principally upon the western slopes of the hills. Trees are rare, except in sheltered places, and where not pro- tected, are blown out of all shape. The cottages generally crouch under some bank, or often in a ravine or quarry, and none but the smallest sheep and native cattle can live on the pastures The young people migrate to the eastern mining districts of Glamor- gan and Monmouth. Carmarthenshire is the breeding ground of the mining popula- tion and their hospital. The population can therefore barely maintain its numbers." Thus in Cardiganshire:

[^1]: 1851. 1861.

[^2]: Males 45,155 44,446 Females 52,459 52,955

[^3]: 97,614 • 97,401

[^4]: Dr. Hunter's Report in "Public Health. Seventh Report, 1864", pp. 498-502, passim.





**[p. 674]**

Under this influence, each parish has a pecuniary interest in reducing to a minimum the number of its resident labourers: — for, unhappily, agricultural labour instead of implying a safe and permanent independence for the hardworking labourer and his family, implies for the most part only a longer or shorter circuit to eventual pauperism — a pauperism which, during the whole circuit, is so near, that any illness or temporary failure of occupation necessitates immediate recourse to parochial relief—and thus all residence of agricultural population in a parish is glaringly an addition to its poor rates Large proprietors21 have but to resolve that there shall be no labourers' dwellings on their estates, and their estates will thenceforth be virtually free from half their responsibility for the poor. How far it has been intended, in the English constitution and law, that this kind of unconditional property in land should be acquirable, and that a landlord 'doing as he wills with his own', should be able to treat the cultivators of the soil as aliens, whom he may expel from his territory, is a question which I do not pre- tend to discuss For that (power) of eviction does not exist only in theory. On a ve- ry large scale it prevails in practice — prevails as a main governing condition in the household circumstances of agricultural labour As regards the extent of the evil, it may suffice to refer to the evidence which Dr. Hunter has compiled from the last census, that destruction of houses, notwithstanding increased local demands for them, had, during the last ten years, been in progress in 821 separate parishes or townships of England, so that irrespectively of persons who had been forced to become non-resident (that is in the parishes in which they work), these parishes and townships were receiv- ing in 1861, as compared with 1851, a population 5 ^ per cent, greater, into house- room 4 ^ per cent. less. When the process of depopulation has completed itself, the result, says Dr. Hunter, is a show-village where the cottages have been reduced to a few, and where none but persons who are needed as shepherds, gardeners, or game- keepers, are allowed to live; regular servants who receive the good treatment usual to their class.3' But the land requires cultivation, and it will be found that the labourers

[^1]: ,; In 1865 this law was improved to some extent.557 It will soon be learnt from ex- perience that tinkering of this sort is of no use.

[^2]: 21 In order to understand that which follows, we must remember that "Close Vil- lages" are those whose owners are one or two large landlords. "Open villages," those whose soil belongs to many smaller landlords. It is in the latter that building specula- tors can build cottages and lodging-houses.

[^3]: 3 A show-village of this kind looks very nice, but is as unreal as the villages that Catherine II saw on her journey to the Crimea.558 In recent times the shepherd also has often been banished from these show-villages; e. g., near Market Harboro' is a sheep-farm of about 500 acres, which only employs the labour of one man. To reduce the long trudges over these wide plains, the beautiful pastures of Leicester and North-





[^1]: ampton, the shepherd used to get a cottage on the farm. Now they give him a thir- teenth shilling a week for lodging, that he must find far away in an open village ["Pub- lic Health. Seventh Report, 1864", p. 137J.

[^2]: " "The labourers' houses" (in the open villages, which, of course, are always over- crowded) "are usually in rows, built with their backs against the extreme edge of the plot of land which the builder could call his, and on this account are not allowed light and air except from the front" (Dr. Hunter's Report, 1. c. ["Public Health. Seventh Re- port, 1864", Ld., 1865], p. 135). Very often the beerseller or grocer of the village is at the same time the letter of its houses. In this case the agricultural labourer finds in him a second master, besides the farmer. He must be his customer as well as his tenant. "The hind with his 10s. a week, minus a rent of £4 a year is obliged to buy at the sel- ler's own terms, his modicum of tea, sugar, flour, soap, candles, and beer" (I.e., p. 132). These open villages form, in fact, the "penal settlements" of the English agri- cultural proletariat. Many of the cottages are simply lodging-houses, through which all the rabble of the neighbourhood passes. The country labourer and his family who had often, in a way truly wonderful, preserved, under the foulest conditions, a thoroughness and purity of character, go, in these, utterly to the devil. It is, of course, the fashion amongst the aristocratic shylocks to shrug their shoulders pharisaically at the building speculators, the small landlords, and the open villages. They know well enough that their "close villages" and "show-villages" are the birth-places of the open villages, and could not exist without them. "The labourers were it not for the small owners, would, for by far the most part, have to sleep under the trees of the farms on which they work" (I.e., p. 135). The system of "open" and "closed" villages obtains in all the Midland counties and throughout the East of England.





**[p. 676]**



[^1]: " "The employer is directly or indirectly securing to himself the profit on a man employed at 10s. a week, and receiving from this poor hind £4 or £5 annual rent for houses not worth £20 in a really free market, but maintained at their artificial value by the power of the owner to say 'Use my house, or go seek a hiring elsewhere, without a character from me' Does a man wish to better himself, to go as a plate- layer on the railway, or to begin quarry-work, the same power is ready with "Work for me at this low rate of wages or begone at a week's notice; take your pig with you, and get what you can for the potatoes growing in your garden.' Should his interest appear to be better served by it, an enhanced rent is sometimes preferred in these cases by the owner (i.e., the farmer) as the penalty for leaving his service" (Dr. Hunter, I.e., p. 132).

[^2]: 21 "New married couples are no edifying study for grown-up brothers and sisters; and though instances must not be recorded, sufficient data are remembered to warrant the remark, that great depression and sometimes death are the lot of the female partici- pator in the offence of incest" (Dr. Hunter, 1. c , p. 137). A member of the rural police who had for many years been a detective in the worst quarters of London, says of the girls of his village: "their boldness and shamelessness I never saw equalled during some years of police life and detective duty in the worst parts of London They live like





**[p. 677]**

Dr. Hunter investigated 5,375 cottages of agricultural labourers, not only in the purely agricultural districts, but in all counties of Eng- land. Of these, 2,195 had only one bedroom (often at the same time used as living-room), 2,930 only two, and 250, more than two.559

I will give a few specimens culled from a dozen counties.

( 1.) Bedfordshire

Wrestlingworth. Bedrooms about 12 feet long and 10 broad, al- though many are smaller than this. The small, one-storied cots are of- ten divided by partitions into two bedrooms, one bed frequently in a kitchen, 5 feet 6 inches in height. Rent, £3 a year. The tenants have to make their own privies, the landlord only supplies a hole. As soon as one has made a privy, it is made use of by the whole neighbour- hood. One house, belonging to a family called Richardson, was of quite unapproachable beauty. "Its plaster walls bulged very like a lady's dress in a curtsey. One gable end was convex, the other concave, and on this last, unfortunately, stood the chimney, a curved tube of clay and wood like an elephant's trunk. A long stick served as prop to pre- vent the chimney from falling. The doorway and window were rhom- boidal." Of 17 houses visited, only 4 had more than one bedroom, and those four overcrowded. The cots with one bedroom sheltered 3 adults and 3 children, a married couple with 6 children, &c.

Dunton. High rents, from £4 to £5; weekly wages of the man, 10s. They hope to pay the rent by the straw-plaiting of the family. The higher the rent, the greater the number that must work together to pay it. Six adults, living with 4 children in one sleeping apartment,

[^1]: pigs, great boys and girls, mothers and fathers, all sleeping in one room, in many in- stances" ("Child. Empl. Com. Sixth Report, 1867," p. 77 sq. [No.] 155). '! "Public Health. Seventh Report, 1864," pp. 9-14, passim.





**[p. 678]**

pay £3 10s. for it. The cheapest house in Dunton, 15 feet long exter- nally, 10 broad, let for £ 3 . Only one of the houses investigated had 2 bedrooms. A little outside the village, a house whose "tenants dunged against the house-side," the lower 9 inches of the door eaten away through sheer rottenness; the doorway, a single opening closed at night by a few bricks, ingeniously pushed up after shutting and covered with some matting. Haifa window, with glass and frame, had gone the way of all flesh. Here, without furniture, huddled together were 3 adults and 5 children. Dunton is not worse than the rest of Biggleswade Union.

(2.) Berkshire

Beenham. In June, 1864, a man, his wife and 4 children lived in a cot (one-storied cottage). A daughter came home from service with scarlet fever. She died. One child sickened and died. The mother and one child were down with typhus when Dr. Hunter was called in. The father and one child slept outside, but the difficulty of securing isola- tion was seen here, for in the crowded market of the miserable village lay the linen of the fever-stricken household, waiting for the wash. The rent of H.'s house, Is. a-week; one bedroom for man, wife, and 6 children. One house let for 8d. a-week, 14 feet 6 inches long, 7 feet broad, kitchen, 6 feet high; the bedroom without window, fireplace, door, or opening, except into the lobby; no garden. A man lived here for a little while, with two grown-up daughters and one grown-up son; father and son slept on the bed, the girls in the passage. Each of the latter had a child while the family was living here, but one went to the workhouse for her confinement and then came home.

(3.) Buckinghamshire

30 cottages — on 1,000 acres of land — contained here about 130- 140 persons. The parish of Bradenham comprises 1,000 acres; it num- bered, in 1851, 36 houses and a population of 84 males and 54 fe- males. This inequality of the sexes was partly remedied in 1861, when they numbered 98 males and 87 females; increase in 10 years of 14 men and 33 women. Meanwhile, the number of houses was one less. Winslow. Great part of this newly built in good style; demand



**[p. 679]**

Water Eaton. Here the landlords, in view of the increasing popula- tion, have destroyed about 20 per cent, of the existing houses. A poor labourer, who had to go about 4 miles to his work, answered the ques- tion, whether he could not find a cot nearer: "No; they know better than to take a man in with my large family."

Tinker's End, near Winslow. A bedroom in which were 4 adults and 5 children; 11 feet long, 9 feet broad, 6 feet 5 inches high at its highest part; another 11 feet 7 inches by 9 feet, 5 feet 10 inches high, sheltered 6 persons. Each of these families had less space than is consid- ered necessary for a convict. No house had more than one bedroom, not one of them a back-door; water very scarce; weekly rent from Is. 4d. to 2s. In 16 of the houses visited, only 1 man that earned 10s. a-week. The quantity of air for each person under the circumstances just described corresponds to that which he would have if he were shut up in a box of 4 feet measuring each way, the whole night. But then, the ancient dens afforded a certain amount of unintentional ventilation.

(4.) Cambridgeshire

Gamblingay belongs to several landlords. It contains the wretchedest cots to be found anywhere. Much straw-plaiting. "A deadly lassitude, a hopeless surrendering up to filth," reigns in Gamblingay. The ne- glect in its centre, becomes mortification at its extremities, north and south, where the houses are rotting to pieces. The absentee landlords bleed this poor rookery too freely. The rents are very high; 8 or 9 per- sons packed in one sleeping apartment, in 2 cases 6 adults, each with 1 or 2 children in one small bedroom.

(5.) Essex

In this county, diminutions in the number of persons and of cot- tages go, in many parishes, hand in hand. In not less than 22 parishes, however, the destruction of houses has not prevented increase of pop- ulation, or has not brought about that expulsion which, under the name "migration to towns", generally occurs. In Fingringhoe, a par-



**[p. 680]**

(6.) Herefordshire

This little county has suffered more from the "eviction-spirit" than any other in England. At Madley, overcrowded cottages generally, with only 2 bedrooms, belonging for the most part to the farmers. They easily let them for £ 3 or £ 4 a-year, and paid a weekly wage of 9s.

(7.) Huntingdon

Hartford had, in 1851, 87 houses; shortly after this, 19 cottages were destroyed in this small parish of 1,720 acres; population in 1831, 452; in 1851, 382; and in 1861, 341. 14 cottages, each with 1 bedroom, were visited. In one, a married couple, 3 grown-up sons, 1 grown-up daughter, 4 children — in all 10; in another, 3 adults, 6 children. One of these rooms, in which 8 people slept, was 12 feet 10 inches long, 12 feet 2 inches broad, 6 feet 9 inches high: the average, without making any deduction for projections into the apartment, gave about 130 cu- bic feet per head. In the 14 sleeping rooms, 34 adults and 33 children. These cottages are seldom provided with gardens, but many of the in- mates are able to farm small allotments at 10s. or 12s. per rood. These allotments are at a distance from the houses, which are without pri- vies. The family "must either go to the allotment to deposit their or- dures", or, as happens in this place, saving your presence, "use a clo- set with a trough set like a drawer in a chest of drawers, and drawn out weekly and conveyed to the allotment to be emptied where its contents were wanted". In Japan, the circle of life-conditions moves more decently than this.



**[p. 681]**

(8.) Lincolnshire

Langtoft. A man lives here, in Wright's house, with his wife, her mother, and 5 children; the house has a front kitchen, scullery, bed- room over the front kitchen; front kitchen and bedroom, 12 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches; the whole ground floor, 21 feet 2 inches by 9 feet 5 inches. The bedroom is a garret: the walls run together into the roof like a sugar-loaf, a dormer-window opening in front. "Why did he live here? On account of the garden? No; it is very small. Rent? High, Is. 3d. per week. Near his work? No; 6 miles away, so that he walks daily, to and fro, 12 miles. He lived there, because it was a ten- antable cot", and because he wanted to have a cot for himself alone, anywhere, at any price, and in any conditions. The following are the statistics of 12 houses in Langtoft, with 12 bedrooms; 38 adults, and 36 children.

TWELVE HOUSES IN LANGTOFT

•ö o i S in «, i S

b.

ouses

1 ! ï 11

3 O 1

"5

umbt erson;

(9.) Kent

Kennington, very seriously overpopulated in 1859, when diphtheria appeared, and the parish doctor instituted a medical inquiry into the condition of the poorer classes. He found that in this locality, where much labour is employed, various cots had been destroyed and no new ones built. In one district stood four houses, named birdcages; each had 4 rooms of the following dimensions in feet and inches:

Kitchen: 9 ft. 5 by 8 ft. 11 by 6 ft. 6. Scullery: 8 ft. 6 by 4 ft. 6 by 6 ft. 6. Bedroom: 8 ft. 5 by 5 ft. 10 by 6 ft. 3. Bedroom: 8 ft. 3 by 8 ft. 4 by 6 ft. 3.

[^1]: X m < u Z.S. X ffl < u Z a.

[^2]: No. 1. 3 5 8 No. 7. 3 3 6

[^3]: " 2. 4 3 7 " 8. 3 2 5 " 3. 4 4 8 " 9. 2 0 2 " 4. 5 4 9 " 10. 2 3 5 " 5. 2 2 4 " 11. 3 3 6 " 6. 5 3 8 " 12. 2 4 6





**[p. 682]**

Brixworth, Pitsford and Floore: in these villages in the winter 20-30 men were lounging about the streets from want of work. The farmers do not always till sufficiently the corn and turnip lands, and the land- lord has found it best to throw all his farms together into 2 or 3. Hence want of employment. Whilst on one side of the wall, the land calls for labour, on the other side the defrauded labourers are casting at it longing glances. Feverishly overworked in summer, and half- starved in winter, it is no wonder if they say in their peculiar dialect, "the parson and gentlefolk seem frit to death at them".

At Floore, instances, in one bedroom of the smallest size, of couples with 4, 5, 6 children; 3 adults with 5 children; a couple with grandfa- ther and 6 children down with scarlet fever, &c; in two houses with two bedrooms, two families of 8 and 9 adults respectively.

(11.) Wiltshire

Stratton. 31 houses visited, 8 with only one bedroom. Penhill, in the same parish: a cot let as Is. 3d. weekly with 4 adults and 4 children, had nothing good about it, except the walls, from the floor of rough- hewn pieces of stones to the roof of worn-out thatch.

(12.) Worcestershire

House-destruction here not quite so excessive; yet from 1851 to 1861, the number of inhabitants to each house on the average, has ri- sen from 4.2 to 4.6.

Badsey. Many cots and little gardens here. Some of the farmers de- clare that the cots are "a great nuisance here, because they bring the poor". On the statement of one gentleman:

(according to him the houses give birth to the inhabitants, who then by a law of Nature press on "the means of housing"). Dr. Hun- ter remarks:

[^1]: "The poor are none the better for them; if you build 500 they will let fast enough, in fact, the more you build, the more they want"

[^2]: "Now these poor must come from somewhere, and as there is no particular attrac- tion, such as doles, at Badsey, it must be repulsion from some other unfit place, which



will send them here. If each could find an allotment near his work, he would not prefer Badsey, where he pays for his scrap of ground twice as much as the farmer pays for his."

The continual emigration to the towns, the continual formation of surplus population in the country through the concentration of farms, conversion of arable land into pasture, machinery, &c, and the con- tinual eviction of the agricultural population by the destruction of their cottages, go hand in hand. The more empty the district is of men, the greater is its "relative surplus population", the greater is their pressure on the means of employment, the greater is the abso- lute excess of the agricultural population over the means for housing it, the greater, therefore, in the villages is the local surplus population and the most pestilential packing together of human beings. The packing together of knots of men in scattered little villages and small country towns corresponds to the forcible draining of men from the surface of the land. The continuous superseding of the agricultural la- bourers, in spite of their diminishing number and the increasing mass of their products, gives birth to their pauperism. Their pauperism is ultimately a motive to their eviction and the chief source of their mis- erable housing which breaks down their last power of resistance, and makes them mere slaves of the landed proprietors and the farmers." Thus the minimum of wages becomes a law of Nature to them. On the other hand, the land, in spite of its constant "relative surplus pop- ulation", is at the same time underpopulated. This is seen, not only locally at the points where the efflux of men to towns, mines, railroad- making, &c, is most marked. It is to be seen everywhere, in harvest time as well as in spring and summer, at those frequently recurring times when English agriculture, so careful and intensive, wants extra hands. There are always too many agricultural labourers for the ordi-

[^1]: " "The heaven-born employment of the hind [see this volume, pp. 672-73] gives dignity even to his position. He is not a slave, but a soldier of peace, and deserves his place in married men's quarters to be provided by the landlord, who has claimed a power of enforced labour similar to that the country demands of the soldier. He no more receives market price for his work than does the soldier. Like the soldier he is caught young, ignorant, knowing only his own trade, and his own locality. Early mar- riage and the operation of the various laws of settlement affect the one as enlistment and the Mutiny Act affect the other" (Dr. Hunter, 1. c, p. 132). Sometimes an excep- tionally soft-hearted landlord relents at the solitude he has created. "It is a melancholy thing to stand alone in one's country," said Lord Leicester, when complimented on the completion of Hookham. "I look around and not a house is to be seen but mine. I am the giant of Giant Castle, and have eat up all my neighbours" [1. c , p. 135].





**[p. 684]**

The gang system obtains almost exclusively in the counties of Lin- coln, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Nottingham, here and there in the neighbouring counties of Northampton, Bed- ford, and Rutland. Lincolnshire will serve us as an example. A large part of this county is new land, marsh formerly, or even, as in others of the eastern counties just named, won lately from the sea. The steam-engine has worked wonders in the way of drainage. What were once fens and sandbanks, bear now a luxuriant sea of corn and the highest of rents. The same thing holds of the alluvial lands won by

[^1]: 11 A similar movement is seen during the last ten years in France; in proportion as capitalist production there takes possession of agriculture, it drives the "surplus" agri- cultural population into the towns. Here also we find deterioration in the housing and other conditions as the source of the surplus population. On the special "prolétariat foncier",a to which this system of parcelling out the land has given rise, see, among oth- ers, the work of Colins, already quoted, and Karl Marx, Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, 2nd edition, Hamburg, 1869, pp, 56, &c. [present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 187 sqq.]. In 1846, the town population in France was represented by 24.42, the agricultural by 75.58; in 1861, the town by 28.86, the agricultural by 71.14 per cent ["Public Health. Seventh Report," p. 129J. During the last 5 years, the diminution of the agricultural percentage of the population has been yet more marked. As early as 1846, Pierre Dupont in his Ouvriers sang:

[^2]: Mal vêtus, logés dans des trous, Sous les combles, dans les décombres, Nous vivons avec les hiboux Et les larrons, amis des ombres.b

[^3]: 21 "Sixth and last Report of the Children's Employment Commission", published at the end of March, 1867. It deals solely with the agricultural gang system.

[^4]: a landowning proletariat - b "Badly clothed, living in holes, under the eaves, in the ruins, with the owls and the thieves, companions of the shadows."





**[p. 685]**

human endeavour, as in the island of Axholme and other parishes on the banks of the Trent. In proportion as the new farms arose, not only were no new cottages built: old ones were demolished, and the supply of labour had to come from open villages, miles away, by long roads that wound along the sides of the hills. There alone had the popula- tion formerly found shelter from the incessant floods of the winter time. The labourers that dwell on the farms of 400-1,000 acres (they are called "confined labourers") are solely employed on such kinds of agricultural work as is permament, difficult, and carried on by aid of horses. For every 100 acres there is, on an average, scarcely one cot- tage. A fen farmer, e. g., gave evidence before the Commission of In- quiry:

"I farm 320 acres, all arable land. I have not one cottage on my farm. I have only one labourer on my farm now. I have four horsemen lodging about. We get light work done by gangs." "

The soil requires much light field labour, such as,weeding, hoeing, certain processes of manuring, removing of stones, &c. This is done by the gangs, or organised bands that dwell in the open villages.

The gang consists of 10 to 40 or 50 persons, women, young persons of both sexes (13-18 years of age, although the boys are for the most part eliminated at the age of 13), and children of both sexes (6-13 years of age). At the head is the gang master, always an ordinary ag- ricultural labourer, generally what is called a bad lot, a scapegrace, unsteady, drunken, but with a dash of enterprise and savoir faire. He is the recruiting-sergeant for the gang, which works under him, not under the farmer. He generally arranges with the latter for piece work, and his income, which on the average is not very much above that of an ordinary agricultural labourer,2' depends almost entirely upon the dexterity with which he manages to extract within the short- est time the greatest possible amount of labour from his gang. The farmers have discovered that women work steadily only under the di- rection of men, but that women and children, once set going, impe- tuously spend their lifeforce — as Fourier knew — while the adult male labourer is shrewd enough to economise his as much as he can. The gang master goes from one farm to another, and thus employs his gang from 6 to 8 months in the year. Employment by him is, there-

[^1]: '•• "Child. Emp. Comm, VI. Report", Evidence [No.] 173, p. 37. 21 Some gang masters, however, have worked themselves up to the position of farm- ers of 500 acres, or proprietors of whole rows of houses.





**[p. 686]**

fore, much more lucrative and more certain for the labouring fami- lies, than employment by the individual farmer, who only employs children occasionally. This circumstance so completely rivets his in- fluence in the open villages that children are generally only to be hired through his instrumentality. The lending out of these indi- vidually, independently of the gang, is his second trade. The "draw- backs" of the system are the overwork of the children and young per- sons, the enormous marches that they make daily to and from the farms, 5, 6, and sometimes 7 miles distant, finally, the demoralisation of the gang. Although the gang master, who, in some districts is called "the driver", is armed with a long stick, he uses it but seldom, and complaints of brutal treatment are exceptional. He is a democratic emperor, or a kind of Pied Piper of Hamelin.560 He must therefore be popular with his subjects, and he binds them to himself by the charms of the gipsy life under his direction. Coarse freedom, a noisy jollity, and obscenest impudence give attractions to the gang. Gener- ally the gang master pays up in a public house; then he returns home at the head of the procession reeling drunk, propped up right and left by a stalwart virago, while children and young persons bring up the rear, boisterous, and singing chaffing and bawdy songs. On the re- turn journey what Fourier calls "phanerogamie", is the order of the day. The getting with child of girls of 13 and 14 by their male com- panions of the same age, is common. The open villages which supply the contingent of the gang, become Sodoms and Gomorrahs,1' and have twice as high a rate of illegitimate births as the rest of the kingdom. The moral character of girls bred in these schools, when married women, was shown above. Their children, when opium does not give them the finishing stroke, are born recruits of the gang.

The gang in its classical form just described, is called the public, co- mmon, or tramping gang. For there are also private gangs. These are made up in the same way as the common gang, but count fewer members, and work, not under a gang master, but under some old farm servant, whom the farmer does not know how to employ in any better way. The gipsy fun has vanished here, but according to all witnesses, the payment and treatment of the children is worse.

[^1]: '' "Half the girls of Ludford have been ruined by going out" (in gangs), 1. c., p. 6, No. 32.





**[p. 687]**

The gang system, which during the last years has steadily increased,1' clearly does not exist for the sake of the gang master. It exists for the enrichment of the large farmers,2' and indirectly of the landlords.3' For the farmer there is no more ingenious method of keeping his la- bourers well below the normal level, and yet of always having an extra hand ready for extra work, of extracting the greatest possible amount of labour with the least possible amount of money,4' and of making adult male labour "redundant". From the exposition already made, it will be understood why, on the one hand, a greater or less lack of employment for the agricultural labourer is admitted, while on the other, the gang system is at the same time declared "neces- sary" on account of the want of adult male labour and its migration to the towns.5' The cleanly weeded land, and the uncleanly human weeds, of Lincolnshire, are pole and counterpole of capitalistic pro- duction.61

11 "They (gangs) have greatly increased of late years. In some places they are said to have been introduced at comparatively late dates; in others where gangs have been known for many years more and younger children are employed in them" (1. c , p. 79, No. 174).

[^1]: 21 "Small farmers never employ gangs." "It is not on poor land, but on land which affords rent of from 40 to 50 shillings, that women and children are employed in the greatest numbers" (1. c , pp. 17, 14 [Nos. 13, 120]).

[^2]: 31 To one of these gentlemen the taste of his rent was so grateful that he indignantly declared to the Commission of Inquiry that the whole hubbub was only due to the name of the system. If instead of "gang" it were called "the Agricultural Juvenile In- dustrial Self-supporting Association", everything would be all right.

[^3]: 41 "Gang work is cheaper than other work; that is why they are employed," says a former gang master ( 1. c, p. 17, No. 14). "The gang system is decidedly the cheapest for the farmer, and decidedly the worst for the children," says a farmer (I.e., p. 16, No. 3).

[^4]: 51 "Undoubtedly much of the work now done by children in gangs used to be done by men and women. More men are out of work now where children and women are employed than formerly" (1. c, p. 43, n. 202). On the other hand, "the labour question in some agricultural districts, particularly the arable, is becoming so serious in consequence of emigration, and the facility afforded by railways for getting to large towns that I" (the " I " is the steward of a great lord) "think the services of children are most indispensable" (1. c, p. 80, n. 180). For the "labour question" in English agricultural districts, differently from the rest of the civilised world, means the landlords' and farmers' question, viz., how is it possible, despite an always increas- ing exodus of the agricultural folk, to keep up a sufficient relative surplus population in the country, and by means of it keep the wages of the agricultural labourer at a minimum?

[^5]: 6! The "Public Health Report", where in dealing with the subject of children's mortality, the gang system is treated in passing,56 ' remains unknown to the press, and, therefore, to the English public. On the other hand, the last report of the "Child.



